
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released January 25th, 2021
Invest Like the Best
Joost van Dreunen - Unlocking Value in Gaming
Joost van Dreunen is an investor in the gaming world and a professor at NYU's Stern School of Business. We cover the rise and decline of GameStop, what parts of the value chain actually make money in video games, and the evolution of the video games business model.

00:00:00
01:01:35
Introduction
Patrick: [00:01:59] Our guest today is Joost van Dreunen, an investor in the gaming world, professor at NYU Stern School of Business, and former CEO and co-founder of Super Data Research, a data-driven gaming firm that was acquired by Nielsen. He also recently authored one-up: creativity, competition, and the global business of video games, a great book on the gaming industry. Our conversation covers the rise and decline of GameStop, what parts of the value chain actually make money in video games, the evolution of the video games business model from Nintendo to Fortnite, and what other industries can learn by studying the video game industry. I hope you enjoy this great conversation with Joost van Dreunen.

The History of the Gaming Industry
Patrick: [00:02:38] So Joost, we're going to tell a story today of the history of the business side of video games and gaming. I recently finished your book, and that's how we met. I thought it was a fantastic single industry, deep-dive, history lesson, picture of the day, and potentially, of the future. I think, obviously, we have to start at the beginning. What do you think the most appropriate first chapter of the modern gaming business is? And what defined it?

Joost: [00:03:04] The First thing to really cover is really the moment Nintendo came into the scene. I guess, the short recap of the '70s and early '80s goes as follows. You had Atari and Pong and Pac-Man and all that, and which led to a huge undifferentiated market that ultimately turned off and alienated its customer base. So it grew explosively to $2 billion in value in only a few years, as the console moved out of the arcade and into the living room. And very quickly after that, you had too many manufacturers and too little content. There was just no reason for people to care, to give a crap. So the market then collapsed, and, quite literally, became decimated to like a 10th of its value, to about $200 million in '83. And then in '84, '85, you see the Japanese firm by the name of Nintendo roll in. And everybody thought they were crazy.

So you have this phenomenon of video games, which everybody at the time thought was a fad. So the games industry emerges from the toy aisle at retail. That's really where it started. Video games, in their early iteration, were basically toys with chips built into them, and a lot of people regarded them as such. Basically, it's a hula hoop with a TV screen. So for all those reasons, people thought, well, this is not going to be too much, another toy makes it big and then disappears next holiday season. In '84, then '85, Nintendo comes in and they start to really put some terms around what it's like to be a platform, what it's like to be a manufacturer of hardware, and what it's like to be a company that hosts third-party content. And so the very first thing about the games industry that has led all the way to its success today has been this aggressive way of curating content, of building third-party relationships, of keeping this promise to consumers, having something new to show, something worth their time to show.

And so from the beginning, because such a segment that was under pressure from just bullshit economics that they had before that. You have very high standards in terms of production, development, marketing, and so on. And so that then becomes the blueprint for how everything else is done. Nintendo really wrote that blueprint, they really drafted it in the '80s. And some of the aspects of it, for instance, were that, as a content creator, you would only be allowed to have five titles on their platform, and would have to be a two year exclusive to their platform. You would have to buy 30,000 copies of your own game to send around or marketing. And you'd have to give Nintendo a license fee. And so publishers at the time had just disintermediated from the manufacturers.

So the origin, for instance, of Activision, it's not the Activision that you know today. But back then, Activision was basically eight people that escaped Atari and just went out on their own. They realized that they had been on a salary job building these hit titles would make millions. And they said, "Well, that's not fair." So they just went out on their own and just disintermediated from that whole business and then start selling the content to other manufacturers and just made a lot more money for themselves. So in that universe, the idea that you would all pool resources and pay a platform some license fee so that they could collectively market the devices and create an install base, against which you could then sell content, nobody thought of that. And Nintendo came up with this idea, and it's immediately turned the fortunes of the industry around. So that's really the first chapter for me to think about.


 

Source: Visual Capitalist

Patrick: [00:06:27] I love this idea that what broke the late '70s industry was oversupply. Nintendo artificially constrained supply to improve quality, and that kicked everything off. And I think that begs the question of, what I would think about as, the era of video games that people my age mostly grew up in, which is you went to a store, you bought a 40 to $60 CD ROM or whatever it was, and you stuck it on your PC or your console. That was the product. So talk us through what we'll call the product era of video games. And obviously, we'll transition into the modern versions which have come to dominate.

Joost: [00:07:04] It's a similar experience that I had too. I remember you got this Nintendo Entertainment System, and then, of course, promptly took a week off to play. It was awesome to play Super Mario and Zelda. It was really a significant entertainment experience for a lot of people. In that conventional model, you'd have effectively a razor blade business model. So you sell the hardware, but then you make money on the software, the devices, and that's still the case today. You have to subsidize, you have to spend billions of dollars developing this cool technology with lots of chips and bits and bytes, and then hopefully, you'll have cool enough content that people will want to buy, not just one, but most of your games. And that's where you really make the margin. And so on a product model then... You've already talked about scale, volume, economies of scale, and for the retail business, of course, that's where you just want to pump out as many of these things as possible.

And in the beginning life was, I think, still pretty good. In the early '80s, you had Nintendo subsidizing the retailer, saying, "Take all these units. You don't pay us anything until you actually sell one of them." Retail is like, "Fine. We'll put it into the store somewhere. We'll see if it works." They had no faith in it at the time. But they very aggressively subsidized that effort. And then over time, they start to see, "Okay, actually, people want this, people like this, they enjoy this. They like Super Mario. They liked Zelda." And then it's a matter of just selling more copies. Because now I have this thing in my house. What else can I play on this? And so you see this boom in terms of content creators starting to make games for it. And that's where the retailers start to play a really important role in terms of getting cartridges to people, but also just marketing and solving a discovery issue.

So you imagine your mother walking into a retailer in the '80s and '90s going, "Well, he wants to play a game. It's his birthday. What should I get him?" So that was where the retailers really had still in a very role in terms of marketing and discovery, and really just guiding consumers to this universe. Over time, that started to erode, of course, but it was initially really about economies of scale. So you see a GameStop acquiring lots of its competitors. Of course, this is after it spun off from Barnes and Nobles because they felt that that was the same business, which wasn't the same as the book business so much. But it was really about economies of scale, volume, and then driving margins on these titles.

And then, of course, ultimately, because it's that way, it tends to be very much dependent on the holiday cycles. So November, December, the two months out of the year when they have 40 to 50% of annual sales in a traditional product model. And so that means, of course, that in June, July, you have all the conventions, like E3, where they showcase the new wares for the holiday season. So it gets very crowded and very, very expensive very quickly because now, you have EA and Activision all spending lots of money to get the new shooter game out on time, and marketing the thing. The retail model and the product-based business worked really well in terms of scale and volume, but eventually, of course, becomes really cumbersome and expensive. And it leads to this consolidation across the value chain, and it makes it easier to invest. There are only a few winners, but the overall value is limited.

Patrick: [00:10:10] One of my favorite little charts or tables in the book is for the $60 game. It breaks down the capture of that revenue, if you will, by five main players in the chain. So those are the developer, the publisher, the platform, the distributor, and the retailer. I was quite surprised by some of these percentages, maybe most notably that the publisher makes twice as much as the developer, in a traditional sense. Just walk us through each of those five categories, what they did, and how they earn their share.

Joost: [00:10:38] Developers are really the makers of the game. So these are the people that have all the creative talent. This is the art designers, this is the programmers, the engineers. This is people wearing full-body suits with ping pong balls for stop motion recording. That's really where all of that Hollywood style stuff happens. And then the publisher is really the corporate components to a lot of this. And so they manage all the relationships with sales channels, they put up the capital, they will have a legal department, HR department that will run across different labels and across different development studios. They build scale that way. So just like a movie label that will have different studios working on projects at the same time. And they just have an efficiency by way of running the corporate component as a single unit. If you think of Take-Two Interactive, they will have Rockstar, which is the studio behind Grand Theft Auto, which is one of their big titles, and Red Dead Redemption. But they also have 2K, which is a big label for, for instance, NBA 2K.

So here is then an example of a publisher that has multiple studios and they each have different labels, just like a music or a film business would have different flavors and categories and genres under one flag. Naturally, because they have access to the markets and access to the platform relationships, they are in a position to just capture more of the value than the developers can. The developers are really forfeiting their ability to invest, make their access to capital dependent on working with the publisher. And they, of course, don't have a direct relationship in a traditional product model to the platform holders. Basically, the publisher can charge the fee for that. And so they can charge double that the developer ultimately receives. Does that make sense so far?

The Rise and Decline of GameStop
Patrick: [00:12:25] It does. And just so that we don't keep everyone guessing out there, in the book, the developer gets 20%, the publisher, 40% of the total, the platform, which should be like a Nintendo, 15%, a small amount for the distributor, and the remainder 20% for the retailer, like a GameStop. So that's sort of how it breaks down. We've talked through the platform already, and Nintendo's creative model was that they would take a bit also on things that were sold on their platform. That's how they ultimately make money. Distributor moves stuff around, and then the retailer is, ultimately, I think GameStop is... This is our opportunity to talk about what I think is one of the most interesting companies in the story that you've written, because everyone that is a gamer or like me as a kid, used to go into GameStop all the time and browse around and buy stuff, is familiar with the simple store in a mall somewhere or whatever. And I think it has this two-part history that I'd love you to walk us through, one, because, in its heyday, it was an incredibly interesting business, especially because of how it created a competitive advantage versus other retailers like Walmart that are more generalist, and it was a specialist. And then, of course, for its decline, which has been precipitous. So I'd love to take that in two parts. Maybe you could begin by telling us why GameStop was so successful, what it did for its customers, and how it knew its customers and tailored its experience around them because I think some of those ideas might be portable.

Joost: [00:13:39] If I told you earlier that the industry crashed in the early '80s, that same year that the video games industry fell on its face, is when these two, I think they went to Harvard, these two guys, they started GameStop. They wanted to sell software. They thought, "Well, computers are going to be a big thing. So let's just go and only sell software." They did that for a while until, ultimately, they started acquiring competitors, it became a business based on economies of scale. And of course, as it gets bigger, it gets attention from larger entertainment, retailers like Barnes and Noble, acquired the whole thing, and then eventually spun it off again. So their success in the very early stages was really dependent on just basic economics. They just could have been selling frozen yogurt for that matter. It was really just about having retail space and presence.


 

Source: One Up: Creativity, Competition, and the Global Business of Video Games

What made GameStop successful after its spinoff from Barnes and Noble was its incredible focus on its customer base. And it became a specialty retailer. This is the story, if you've ever talked to GameStop people or former game stuff, people, they will always say the same thing. It's like if you go to Walmart and you want to get Grand Theft Auto or a new Zelda game, Samantha from housewares has to go get the key and walk you over to this glass cabin. And is it this one? Is that one? So it's a very different purchasing experience than you get in a GameStop. And for my class at NYU, I will challenge my students with the same exercise, which is, go to a GameStop and see if you can outmaneuver and outwit one of the clerks on their knowledge of a title, a franchise, the latest edition of XYZ.

What made GameStop successful after its spinoff from Barnes and Noble was its incredible focus on its customer base...you'll find that the clerks are really well-read....They really invested in their staff to make them differentiated from more general retail stores. Another component, then, of what they do, of course, is they know their audience well,

And you'll find that the clerks are really well-read. They know the space really well. They know all the games. And so that's a very different experience, especially for a category like games, which, of course, is a bit of a fringe form of entertainment at the time, '80s and '90s. You need someone to help you navigate the space. They really invested in their staff to make them differentiated from more general retail stores. Another component, then, of what they do, of course, is they know their audience well, so they have all these loyalty programs, but they also do really clever things, like they will always have a ramp. And I don't know about you, Patrick, but I always wonder, why are they so good about having the ability to have wheelchairs in here? You could see them... I thought that was so nice. It's the only retail store that has consistent ramps everywhere. And I realized now that it was possibly also for wheelchairs, but the way it was told to me, it was primarily for people with strollers.

But the way it was told to me, it was primarily for people with strollers. Because they figured out that 14-year-old boys, don't have any money, but Mom has money. Mom is pushing a stroller, and she needs to be able to maneuver through the store, or she's never going to come here. So the aisles in the GameStop are also very wide, basically, allow for stroller traffic to maneuver easily. That sort of focus on their customer base, and who's actually in the store, I think, is genius.

Then the third component, really, that drove their success, and to this day, I think is one of their biggest draws, is used game sales. After you finish a product game, conventional model, you play a game, and you solve all the levels and solve all the puzzles, and you rescue the princess, and then, that's kind of dumb. So the replay value of a product-based game tends to be limited, as opposed to say, online games, that you could play forever and ever. So you want to trade them in. You've finished Assassin's Creed, it sits there collecting dust, and so, you can go and then use it for in-store credit. And it's never a lot.

You could have these very significant emotional experiences with a game for a hundred hours, and then you go to GameStop, and they'll give you five bucks for it, but it's five bucks. Now I'm halfway to the next game. Their ability to do that wasn't so much because they're trying to be nice to people, of course. This doesn't really depreciate in quality, right? A game is a game is a game. It's not like a car, which you drive off the lot, and it's worthless, but it's also being used now, and it has a lot of moving parts. The game, at the beginning of a harvest cycle, is the same quality as the game is at the end of the harvest cycle.

In other words, they were then able to resell the same game, six times, on average. Blockbuster titles have a resale value of six times for GameStop. And what it does is drive traffic, and of course, it generates a lot of revenue. It also creates a lot of friction with the publishers who don't get paid out of the other five transactions. They only get paid the first time, so that never really set well with them. But for a GameStop, it meant that a quarter of their revenues annually comes from used game sales. They really managed to do that by having a dedicated staff for it. That's something that the Best Buys and Targets of the world, they just can't follow. They tried. They tried repeatedly, but they just can't follow that effort. That's what differentiates a GameStop and led to its ultimate success in the '90s and early 2000s.

Patrick: [00:18:16] I love the idea of specialty inventory management. I can't imagine how complicated it must have been.

Joost: [00:18:22] Yeah, they have two kinds of books. What's the value of a game that's been sold three times already? And then, where is it stored? Is it in Arkansas? Is it in Pittsburgh? Where do you keep this stuff? So they have a dedicated team of 400 people, and that's all they do, is the used game sales. They just manage that inventory, and do the logistics and shipping it around, which is fascinating.

Patrick: [00:18:44] I love it also, how, a magazine people might remember, called Game Informer, which was sort of the official GameStop, and I think it's actually literally the only gaming magazine that still exists. It was a large share, and everyone else went out of business, but they're still around, and yet another sort of content-driven ecosystem, flywheel-inducing thing, that GameStop introduced. Love all these specialty tricks that they had.

What, then, is the turning point? The stock market investors today, who look at GameStop's stock, you're not going to see a pretty picture. Went from this really interesting specialty retailer, with some dominant competitive advantages, to being in not a great space. We have talked about a transition in gaming from a product model to digital distribution and mobile model, and maybe free to play. Talk us through that transition, maybe using GameStop's decline as a jump-off.

Joost: [00:19:31] I spent the last five years predicting the end of GameStop, either by way of just bankruptcy or by acquisition by Amazon. The reason is fundamental that that leadership at GameStop has been incapable of acknowledging the shift of digital. Retail people are diehard, hardcore. If I've just told you about how great they were all these front of the house aspects, that's their world, right? They're a dollar per square footage type of metric, and to them, digital is this weird thing that doesn't make sense in their universe. To illustrate that, they described digital in their earnings reports as basically prepaid game cards. It's like, "Oh, digital is an opportunity for us. It's not a threat. Digital distribution is going to be totally fine, because we're going to sell, in the store, these codes for money. And then we'll just make money that way." It's like, "No, dude. They're going to start selling your entire game through these new channels. And they're not going to come to the store, not for the games or your prepaid game cards." But in their sort of tone-deaf universe for them, that's being part of on the front end of the digitalization of the industry. If you put it in business school terms, it's the mental inertia of management.


 

Source: One Up: Creativity, Competition, and the Global Business of Video Games

They just don't have it, that sort of mental model that they hold onto, and refuse to surrender. That's one of the reasons I've been kind of bearish on them this whole time, because it was, "Come on, get with the program, you see it happen around you." So they tried, they made some efforts. They've made a few acquisitions over the years. They bought a digital distribution platform, and so, they try to participate, but they mostly have been staying the course that they've had for the decade before that. So that's one of the components that I think have been missing out on. Then GameStop, in and of itself, digitalization is affecting all aspects of the conventional supply chain, right? In a product-based business, it is so tempting to think of digital as a creative revenue saying, "Oh, it's extra money, that's great." But really, it's a fundamental shift. And if you don't believe that for your own segment, well, what's going on with Tower Records?

If you recall, back in the day, that was the dopest music store in the world, you have musicians and rock stars, all doing cocaine, side by side with the customers, and party all day, talk about music. That was the place to be, right. Then it became this massive franchise. And then the CD came around, and it's sort of stuck around. Then iTunes and Napster basically murdered that whole business, in collusion with the actual owners, because they refused to acknowledge it. Why isn't there a Tower Records digital distribution point, right? By the time, you get to it's a distant memory. So GameStop has always been one foot in the grave, in that sense, because they haven't been to be able to do the same thing.

But I think because they are so good at what they do in the conventional games market and because the games market has been, never really scrutinized to the same degree that music and film and video have been, for that reason. I think GameStop has been able to stumble forward so far. I think maybe now, as a result of COVID and corona, that you have pointers like, "Does it still hold water? Or is it, are we now in a space officially, where I'll just buy directly off of a publisher? I'll just go to Xbox Live, and use Game Pass, or EA Play, all these new services that have a lot of wind in our sales, because of the pandemic. Is that then the final nail in the coffin?" If it is, it wouldn't be because of COVID. But I think COVID has then finally laid bare some of their weaknesses. GameStop used to be this communal point, but I think it's lost a lot of that shine in the last few years.

Free-To-Play Models as a Key Turning Point
Patrick: [00:22:54] Talk us through a little bit, the landscape today, and how it's evolved, in terms of market share revenue share, let's call it, between the three ways that people play video games. So you've got PC, you've got consoles like Nintendo or Xbox or PlayStation, and then you've got mobile as an enormous third category. How has that changed through history? Where has it left us today? And that'll give us an excuse to talk about sort of the digitization of everything, games as a service.

Joost: [00:23:21] The three major categories are PC, console, and mobile. So PC was of course really where a lot of things started, but that ended very quickly because the platform is open. There's a lot of components to it. Piracy's, of course, a problem in the '70s, '80s, '90s, and so on, so nobody wants to invest all this money into stuff that other people are just going to go out and steal. Or at least that's how they thought of the world. Very quickly, the publishers all went with consoles, because of their steady hardware features. There are no tricks, there are no changing hardware specs. You don't have to build 15 versions of the same game. Around the 2000s, you see basically a market that's 95% console, and 5% PC games.

That carries on for a few years, until 2004, a company called Valve, launched a digital platform called Steam, which originally was really so that they could send updates for their own games to people over the Internet, and work out bugs, glitches, add content, and so on. They had a more fluid idea of what gaming could be like. And as you release updates and software changes, it improves the user experience. In 2014, they launched this, and then, very quickly realized, "We should sell third-party content, as well. We need to have something that other people can use as well." For that reason, you start to see the tides turn a little bit. Digitalization then allows PC to regain some of its glory. And so, today, PC is the second-largest category, bigger than console nowadays.

The way to think about it, in 2021 terms, is that mobile, which we'll get to in a second is, let's say, if that one is $4 in terms of total market share, then a PC is about $2, and the console is $1. So it's a 4:2:1 between the three. So as the industry shifts more towards digitalization, PC then regains all this momentum. Then in 2007, Apple launched the iPhone, and the iPhone really shifts the mobile space. Apple comes in, and they revolutionized the model. Rather than having to build the same game for 400 different handsets for AT&T, you now have to own make one version of the game that goes into the hands of all of these people everywhere, that are just spending 600 bucks or a thousand bucks on their new iPhones and are eager to try out new content. The iPhone revolutionizes it because it becomes this must-have fancy device. At the same time, before as no one has ever tried to use a touchscreen interface. So a game like Angry Birds, in addition to its brilliant design, and its incredible creative marketing effort, it's also a game that teaches you how to swipe. For Apple, it makes sense to foreground a game that teaches people how to actually use the thing.


 

Source: One Up: Creativity, Competition, and the Global Business of Video Games



But that's not really when it takes off. Mobile gaming takes off, not in 2007, it takes off in 2009, and Apple turns the key on free-to-play monetization. And that's the moment when they take the scaffolding down, and you can go bananas. So there's no ceiling to what people can spend. Free-to-play monetization becomes this breakout moment for the industry, because up until then, in a product-based business, you end up spending 60 bucks or five bucks or 99 cents upfront, and then you get to play the game. In a free-to-play model, you can play as much as you like, and if you want to spend money, cool, that's up to you, but you get to play anyway. So there's a lot of value and a lot of content for users there. Now, all of a sudden, you have this hockey stick, in terms of revenue, from the mobile space, that crashes into console and PC. Naturally, around that time, you hear a lot about the death of the console because, "Oh, it's so close to the console, the console's going to go die now." The PC, of course, is the same. It's like, "Oh, well that's such a fringe device, blah, blah, blah." It turns out all three of them grow. All three of the categories, continue to do really well, up until the present day, where the console business today, off the top of my head, it's about $20 billion in terms of software sales annually. The PC market is $35 billion. Then the remainder, it's about 85 billion, is mobile. That's just the software business, but then, there's also the hardware components to it. But if we purely look at content, the industry just explodes from $30 billion in the early 2000s to about 150, 175 today. It's massive.

Mobile gaming takes off, not in 2007, it takes off in 2009, and Apple turns the key on free-to-play monetization. And that's the moment when they take the scaffolding down, and you can go bananas. So there's no ceiling to what people can spend. Free-to-play monetization becomes this breakout moment for the industry, because up until then, in a product-based business, you end up spending 60 bucks or five bucks or 99 cents upfront, and then you get to play the game. In a free-to-play model, you can play as much as you like, and if you want to spend money, cool, that's up to you, but you get to play anyway.

Patrick: [00:27:33] The free-to-play transition, I think, has got to be one of the most interesting business case studies ever, because of how it's aligned with digital distribution, which is so much easier than physical distribution. But I'm sure at the time, the pioneers of this maybe felt like idiots. They're giving away the thing, and the uncertainty attached with giving something away, and someone once told me, that its key distinguishing feature is free-to-play, versus free to win. In a lot of the most successful games, you can even win the game, and finish it without paying any money. Talk about the details of this business decision. Who were the pioneers in this kind of thinking, and why has it been so successful?

Joost: [00:28:10] The free-to-play model comes in perpendicular to how things have been going and functioned up until that point. You hear the CEOs of these big public traded companies, Take-Two, Strauss Zelnick going, "Yeah, free-to-play, it's not for us. You can't fault Take-Two. Take-Two just broke 200 bucks a share the other day. When I started my business, they were trading at $9 a share, so it's not as if Take-Two's been suffering. From a measurement perspective, this is a company, and this is a legacy publisher, as I think of them. They're used to these Hollywood economics, where you just spend a lot of capital upfront. Grand Theft Auto V spent $260 million, roughly split equally between development and marketing. That's a huge amount of money, right? A quarter of a billion dollars, to get this thing out, and of course, it makes a billion, within three days after launch. Those are the economics of a blockbuster game title on console. For the mindset or the management team that puts something like that together, for them to think about these tiny screens in your pocket, that have these 99 cents or these free games, that makes no sense at all.

Which to me, echoes that same sentiment that you would see in Hollywood, when TV became very popular when it started to popularize throughout the US, filmmakers and film producers was like, "But this is crap. Look at this trash, low resolution, black and white television. This is not the form factor that would facilitate the spectacle that we're used to making. It doesn't match the economics that we have today." TV in its early phase was almost offensive to filmmakers. Nowadays, people can't wait to take Netflix money to make amazing things. But back then, that new form factor, that new format, was perpendicular to how people were used to doing things. Free-to-play in gaming was sort of the same for legacy publishers. They thought of it as something that was really weird, wonky, and almost blasphemy to how they had been doing things. Then, of course, you see things like Supercell and you see companies like Tencent, and they become the biggest companies out there with these free-to-play mechanics, like League of Legends.

To be clear, so free-to-play does not mean, "I spent money, therefore, you lose." It's mostly vanity items and visual and aesthetic upgrades. You can have some games where you could spend some money, and I get a higher percentage hit rate. So in a World of Tanks, you can buy golden bullets, like give me a bonus. But none of it is, "I spend, I win." Then I think, for that reason, it's something that's always overlooked, but it goes very much against the logic of having to spend a hundred, 200, $300 million to be successful. That's where free-to-play kind of sits. It became this oddball phenomenon for legacy publishers. Because of that, of course, the winners in that scenario, the new generation of digital-native companies, became the ones that won that round.

One of Valve's biggest titles is Team Fortress. Team Fortress originally was 30 bucks. And then they gave it away for free to play. They said, "Don't pay us for the game, but if you want to buy a funny hat for your character, then you can give us some money." And it just blew the roof off of that thing right away. They learned very quickly to free-to-play is the best way to monetize, because it gives a lot of choice to the user. Conventional publishers got stuck on their product-based business and the revenue model that goes with it. Free-to-play opened the door for a lot of newcomers to take market share.

Patrick: [00:31:27] Talk us through the accessibility side of all this, as we transition from a product world to a digitally distributed, free-to-play model where you're paying for cosmetics, or a lot of these games, seems like you can pay to speed things up, buy coins to advance quicker, or something like this. Not necessarily win, but to speed things up. It seems like in this world, the top of the funnel becomes more important. You need more people playing the games, the whales, that spend the most money at the bottom of the funnel, to drive the revenue. How has that affected the gaming industry? Just fascinated by how these dynamics in the revenue models change the type of games that get created and get popular.

Joost: [00:32:02] Initially you see companies that are very reliant on a handful of customers that spend by far the most money. I'm not kidding, when I say, I used to be the data business around this. So, I would have these data providers and I would call them sometimes saying, "Why does it say 50,000 euros in this line item here? that seems like an anomaly." It's like, "Oh no, that is one of our Saudi customers and he ordered a custom sword for his character in his game." These ridiculous purchases. And so some of these companies early on were very dependent on just a handful of ridiculous customers, just the profile of these people alone. You wouldn't invest in it because if one of those people gets hit by a bus, half your business is gone. So that's not something that you want to be relying on.

But free-to-play really became is a slow drip. Free-to-play was of course started very quickly the model of the casino mechanics of, "Well, who are big spenders and can be monetized aggressively and how long can we keep them table kind of thing?" But you realize that it's really about retention as the cost of acquisition goes up in free-to-play because it is all the same. All these games are free. Everybody has now accepted this $0 price point. As a result, there's just endless marketing going on to all get users at the top of the funnel and then try to convert them onto the next and the next. That's proven to be increasingly difficult. Retention really comes down to this. As it costs me more to get people into my game, I'm going to instruct my designers to be more aggressive with the bottlenecks to encourage spending.

You don't want to wait for your mom to come online on Facebook and help you herd your purple cows. Cool, then give me some money. And so it goes. And so they start to really squeeze people, which is of course is a turnoff. It gives a very different experience than if you have this open meadow of opportunity. So in that context, you start to see a lot of friction around free-to-play mechanics becoming really aggressive and that was a dog whistle for a lot of the legacy publishers, who merely said, "See, they're only about getting paid and this is a very hollow, shallow way of doing business. This is not about arts and culture and creating things. This is really about squeezing dollars out of old ladies." And to some degree that was effectively the model.

What makes this all make sense is network effects. As you start building a social layer into these games, that's when things really start to gel. And so League of Legends, for instance, if you follow that example, they never really are aggressive about microtransactions and never really drive people to the point where they make them spend money or they get stuck. But what they do is to say, "Well, here are all your friends, and here is a really thriving community around it. We should have e-sports where you can come and see the tournament of these really great players and share with all the people that also like the things that you like and celebrate together the release of this new character," blah, blah, blah. Games stopped being this box thing and they start being these digital on offline experiences that you share with other people. So free-to-play in many ways, and for all of its ills, it also had a lot of benefits down the line as they move through that model.

Players in the Gaming Industry
Patrick: [00:35:06] Talk a bit about in that social aspect, the key players like Twitch and Discord that have in their own right become cultural phenomenons and really important social networks or at least entertainment networks. What role do they play? What other companies are interested in that space? Anything else that you can say about this kind of migration of gaming from this nerdy niche thing to a much more mainstream thing that's very social?

Joost: [00:35:30] The idea that you would want to see other people online doing anything seemed ridiculous 10 years ago. Now it seems normal, but I have a seven-year-old, he doesn't know any better. He practically tells me to like and subscribe when I put him to bed at night. And so, I say, "Close the door."

Patrick: [00:35:46] That's too dystopian, that's not actually what happened.

Joost: [00:35:48] Twitch I thought it was interesting in that it would create a live feed. And if you are a gamer from an early age on ideally with siblings, then you instantly understand that how common and normal and organic it is to watch somebody else play. I was the older brother. So I would then troubleshoot certain levels because my kid brother couldn't solve them and we would have house rules about every other life and every other level you'd have to hand over the controller. That was just a house rule.

So I finished the level, then it's the other person's turn and so on. As you progress through life, and then you go to college, I had this one friend, he was an animator, he was really into horror games. I was all into hanging out and playing games together. I can't play that stuff man, I'm too feeble for this. So I would basically watch him play Silent Hill for hours on end. It was just like psychological terror that happens, it's awful but it's a really fun experience as long as I don't have to drive. This phenomenon of watching other people play video games is very, very common. Twitch then make that something that was online. And now suddenly we have interesting people, in the same way, that you would have a cool radio personality talk between cool songs. So that's why I think Twitch was a very interesting acquisition by Amazon. They purchased them in 2013, 14 for like a billion dollars, a little shy of a billion dollars, right from the nose of Google.


 

Source: One Up: Creativity, Competition, and the Global Business of Video Games

And live streaming of course has this additional component, which I think YouTube has overlooked for a long time, watching simultaneously with other people. So as a Dutchman stranded in New York now for 20 years, the one thing that I like about the World Cup is that I know that all my other Dutch friends are watching the same game at the same time, we're watching it...and that's what Twitch gives you too, that sort of magical experience of watching at the same time with other people. The other platform you mentioned, Discord I think. Once you get past the viewing, you really talking about online communities and I think Twitch is a little too public and email's way too private, these listers. But having a curated group of humans through work or centered around a hobby or interest that you share, I think it'd be a very effective way to just have a good time with others. And what Discord does so well is it integrates with all these other phenomena like watching online, talking online, exchanging videos, playing together. I'm not surprised that they were valued at $7 billion last month, because they are effectively a social connective tissue between all of these online activities.

Patrick: [00:38:14] I'd love to talk now about just the world as it exists today. The most interesting companies, who make the money, right? We talked earlier about how the pie was shared of the $60 video game that you bought at GameStop. How has that changed? What does that look like today? Maybe we can start there, who is making the money in this modern world? And then I want to ask about some specific businesses and lessons that you think other parts of the business world could take and learn from the video game industry.

Joost: [00:38:38] The movers and shakers are companies like Epic Games, obviously that has a lot to do of course with the amount of money that Tencent pumps into the ecosystem. But surprisingly, if you take sort of the clear-cut business theory, it doesn't really apply to a lot of this in that you think that a lot of these businesses should have been out of business by now. You think that GameStop should have been gone. You think that large publishers like EA would have been out-competed by Tencent by now, but somehow they're all still here and they're all making a mint, and I think that it has everything to do with the explosive growth of the industry. And so all the boats went up. There was some consolidation, there was some shakeout for companies like Atari. They try to, but they never quite regained their former glory.

But most of the companies that were there 10 years ago are still here, they just take on a different position in the market. And I think one of the notable things is that today the market is no longer governed by Japanese and American companies, it's really to Chinese companies. 20 years ago, it was the Japanese companies, Nintendo, Sony, and then, of course, the Konamis, Capcoms, Bandai Namcos, and so on that would run the show. 10 years ago then, you see the American companies really drive a lot of the value and take up more market share with EA, Activision, and so on. And then in the present day, it's mostly the Chinese companies, Tencent, NetEase.

The big deciders today are the ones that have the IP and the capital. And so Nintendo is a really good example of that. They've blown everybody away with their ability to, not so much reinvent themselves but just to almost be impervious to market cycles. The Wii was a huge hit, they sold 140 million units of the Wii. And then the Wii U was the opposite, they sold one-tenth of that, they sold 14 million units of the thing and nobody cared for it. It was a crappy device. And that was the point when everybody thought Nintendo's done, Nintendo is toast. And it ends up being totally not the case because the Switch is doing really well. And it's not just doing well in its traditional conventional markets, it's also doing well in China and all these other markets. So they've been able to reinvent themselves and penetrate new market areas. No one saw that coming. So the legacy companies of the world, do really well. At the same time, you have a lot of these newcomers, like the Tencent's I mentioned. In the Tencent universe of course benefits greatly from having made a few smart, although high priced acquisition in the form of Supercell, in terms of Riot Games and a bunch of others where they just have a lot of fingers in a lot of pies and that's just the fingers that we know about. Just a spider, it crawled its way across the universe looking for content and creativity. Then you have some newcomers in the Chinese market, so miHoYo with Genshin Impact for instance. Conventionally, you would think of blockbuster titles and AAA productions coming from North America, from Japan, and now suddenly you have a free-to-play Chinese title that looks and feels like Zelda: Breath of the Wild, which is like sort of the high bar for Nintendo's creativity. But it's free-to-play, it's not 60 bucks, I don't have to buy a dedicated device for it, it's on my phone and it's this open-world universe. So there's a lot of changes happening where the incumbents are being outcompeted and outmaneuvered by newcomers.

If we look back at the North American market, what's really interesting now you have Epic and we have Roblox for instance. Those are the two major ones that have really manifested themselves in an interesting way in that they don't necessarily follow the conventional way of making games. They offer so much more in terms of how they engage their user base and how they make money. You see this now with investment announcements for the Series 8 for Roblox yesterday, valued at $29.5 billion. Good for them and I know a bunch of people on the management team and they're really seasoned people. They know how to get things done, and they have this beautiful model of not just having the game, but also the engine and of course the backbone. And so they have this flywheel that do really well and it speaks to the imagination. And so all it takes is a pandemic to then really of course jump into the front of the row. What it's going to do, it's going to put user-generated content on the map. Because of Roblox, every other company is going to be asked, what are you doing about user-based creativity? How are you going to facilitate that process? And can people monetize that? Can they make money off of this? How do you navigate the space? So it's not so much that you have a novel idea and you're successful in your own right, but you shift the category entirely and I think that that's what Roblox is doing.

I think that's what Epic is doing, which relies not just on its third-party relationships with the Epic Game Store but also have the Unreal Engine. Which they then, of course, sell to Hollywood with having the Mandalorian shot in Unreal Engine 4. All of these aspects, make it so that no longer are we simply making cool games, launching them with a lot of fanfare, and shipping a box to a consumer, now it becomes this ecosystem of creativity. And you see that really in the Epic Games, Robloxes, and you have to ask where legacy publishers are with this. What's Microsoft going to do about this? What's EA you're going to do about this?

Zones of Opportunity in Gaming
Patrick: [00:43:32] I know that you've done some investing in this space in recent times and I'm really curious how you think about the zones of opportunity to invest in the gaming ecosystem. How would you break down the categories in which you could invest like a studio could be one example that seems risky but potentially very high reward? What are the categories and how you think about them? And how do you think about risk-reward in the different categories?

Joost: [00:43:53] I'm a very irrational investor I should say. I also build a business around games, which no one thought it was a good idea. And in retrospect it wasn't, it paid off. We had a great exit, but for the entertainment industry, I think rationalization of the business is always in short supply, which is to say, you can take a piece of paper and a pen to it and say, "Well, what actually works here?" So my angle in all this is, I like it when companies are entering a new space that is uncluttered with natural apex predators. So the reason mobile did so well is because all of the conventional publishers that held all the IP and all of the creative development power didn't think that mobile was going to be a big deal. I spoke with them. I said to Ubisoft, "What's up?" They're like, "Eh, we're going to sit and wait." Because to them before the iPhone, mobile was a shit-show, because of the mechanics and the software languages that you needed to go through. And so from development, it just didn't have any margin in it. They saw this fancy new phone and they see Apple, Apple is trying to get their piece, of course, they're like, "Yeah, we're not going to run at this. We're going to just have some of the newcomers first break their legs and then we'll step over the dead bodies and see if we can claim something." Because of that, they moved so slow in that new category that allowed newcomers to take most of the value out of it. As an investor, I always look for moments where that's happening, where the incumbents are just sort of sitting on something but not acting on it. And then you have these newcomers creating and you see the numbers go up and I'm talking about healthy numbers. There is a phenomenon where you can say, "Well, what about Fall Guys or Among Us?"

As an investor, I always look for moments where that's happening, where the incumbents are just sort of sitting on something but not acting on it. And then you have these newcomers creating and you see the numbers go up and I'm talking about healthy numbers. There is a phenomenon where you can say, "Well, what about Fall Guys or Among Us?"

I like those games, I think that they're great. I played them for more hours than I should admit, but at the same time it's like, "Well, where does that business go after this?" So they're going to sell me plushies? Is there going to be Among Us 2 and will I care about this? Probably not. They tried and people said, "No, thanks." It's not a flash in the pan, but you have to wonder do we still care about Among Us next year? What's the longevity here? So I'm always curious to look into businesses that are at the cusp of something that's about to go big in terms of it's a space no apex predators want to move into, but they have a plan that goes a little further than we have a cool game around this. Because cloning is a real problem for a title like among Us too, you see lots of newcomers there. If you remember Fortnite was based on PlayerUnknown's Battlegrounds. PUBG basically created the category in and of its own right, but it charged 30 bucks and it was really photorealistic with shooters and guns and all the stuff. And then Fortnite comes around and it's this goofy circus, but it's really smooth and it's free. Epic took the model, took the category and they just ran with it. And so that's a moment to invest. I was told when I came to the US, nice expression, "Pioneers are the people with the arrows in their back."

Patrick: [00:46:38] Pioneers get slaughtered, settlers get rich.

Joost: [00:46:41] So you have to kind of wonder, as an investor it's like sometimes I hear a story from a creative, I love the vision, but that is so far out no one will get it. I don't think being creative is a unique virtue. It's really about, do you have a rationalized model around it that makes sense? And so PUBG came into a lot of success and then Epic just ran with it. I think so many times you see companies run into a success, but then they don't know what to do next to capture the lightning in a bottle again. So that's where I sit as an investor.

Patrick: [00:47:11] Is there anything today that feels to you like mobile did back then when the legacy apex predator companies were sitting on their hands and waiting to see what happens, is there any platform equivalent or business equivalent to that today that you're watching?

Joost: [00:47:25] So mobile was driven a lot by technology. It was a new device category that was very disruptive of existing devices. So it's basically like asking me what's the new iPhone?

Patrick: [00:47:36] Yeah.

Joost: [00:47:38] To answer your question, what for me was interesting about the iPhone wasn't a new device or the hardware specs, it was really the business model that came with it. I always look at Marcus saying, what is the competitive advantage of a business model? It is because of the way that you do things and combined components of the business that you are better than everybody else, not because you also have a website or a mobile game or whatever, a custom controller. So I would look for the business models whatever, a custom controller. So I would look for business models. I looked at it from a product perspective, saying, "Okay, we're all selling boxes through retail." Then we move into a service component, where it's free to play and we can do all that and that's cool. Games are now mainstream, which means that they have 3 billion people worldwide as an addressable audience, which allows for novel business models, business innovations. And if we purely look at how games make money, I can think of four of them. So, it starts with a subscription. If you look at the success of Game Pass, that's 16, 17 million subscribers. Nowadays you have EA Player, you have Ubisoft+. That's just the games category.

Of course, Ubisoft calls it that way because of the success of Disney plus, which is blowing up on its own. So this move towards subscriptions is something that works really well for consumers. They get this buffet of content. Everybody gets the model now, it works across platforms, and it works really well for game companies. Particularly the publicly traded ones, because everybody loves recurrent revenue on their books, as opposed to transaction-based revenue. The evaluations for those companies are much higher, access to capital is better, everybody wins.

And so, the subscription is one, and anybody diving into that has a good time. The second one, because of the size of the audience. You can now also do indirect revenue. So, there's a huge [swat] of people in free-to-play that don't spend any money ever, nor will they, and that's fine, but they're going to have to live with advertising. And so all of the money dedicated to the $70 billion in TV broadcasting U.S., and the 300 billion or so that people spend on advertising worldwide, I should know that exactly because I was at Nielsen, I suppose, but all of those advertisers are desperately looking for pockets and places where they can reach younger consumers.

So, if you look at sports, sports is doing fine, but the average age of baseball fans and football fans, it's not going down. So, for advertisers to look for younger audiences that are still consumers they can influence in their purchase behavior, sports, and traditional media, aren't really the place to go anymore. And so they try to get into games. And so, because of the size of that business and the interest in that, you're going to see advertising appearing all over the place. We already saw Bud Light did a cooler console where you could cool two beers and then KFC had a chicken fryer console. And it always feels kind of bro-y and like everybody had a good time, high-fiving each other. Is that really going to move the needle? Probably not, but it's not just the incumbents, like Candy Crush, Zynga that are trying to explore advertising more aggressively. I think you will very soon see the game equivalent of soap series, where you just have a category of CPG companies that are all going to pool their money and say, "We're going to make games of this nature, this category, this genre," and everybody knows that it's funded by automotive or people that make noodles or whatever. So, advertising will be second. The third one will be the Roblox category of user-generated content. Can you design a secure, safe, creative space for players so that you don't have to acquire new ones all the time, but that you retain them longer, and also they then take care of these part of the production process and the development of the content that keeps everybody else in the ecosystem. I think part of the success of Minecraft was that everybody's creating stuff for everybody else in there. And it's so much to do and see and play.

There's no way that a conventional creative firm could produce the same amount of digital assets and content as its own user base. So, can you figure out a way to set that up so that everybody benefits from it? And I think Roblox will be the first. They haven't quite figured out the economics. I'd value it at 30 billion, but they are 200 million in the hole annually. Like, "All right. Let's hope that works out." And I'm sure that they will, but it would be more credible if they were making lots of profit just yet. Right? So that's the third one.

And then the fourth one, and I think that one is the furthest out, but if you think about how games really have allowed people to attach meaning and value to digital assets, we now do things online that people 10 years ago thought was meaningless and frivolous. Well, when I started my business it was about explaining to people the virtues of virtual items and microtransactions, and why would you spend real money on in-game currency to buy a purple sword to go with your gold horse to go on this, whatever. This timed raid made no sense to a lot of people. Of course, that is naive. I'm sure you have them too, but if you've ever played Magic: The Gathering or Pokemon the card games, each of those has value. Those cards have an intrinsic value. And the creator, the publisher of those cards, control that economy. They tell you exactly how many rares. And so you have the Black Lotus cards in Magic: The Gathering or Spectral Tigers in World of Warcraft, they're worth thousands of dollars and they can be traded against.

So, the equivalent of that in a digital environment requires something new. And so, you start to see the early shape of crypto-based gaming, where now we have basically a financial system that isn't encumbered by international taxes and exchange rates. And you and I can trade against each other on this card or this asset that I've earned and grinded my way through in this game, I can sell it to you and we can try it against it. But, then, so I think that that's going to be on the horizon. So that's still two to five years out. But that's a space where if you can somehow take the mechanic and make it work for you, I think that that could be very interesting and done a lot.

Because ultimately, whether we believe it or not, and this might be our kids, children, it might be behavior that we don't quite understand, but it will have meaning to them in the same way that what we value made no sense to our parents. They never looked at gaming as something meaningful, yet here we are $160 billion later. For all those reasons I think some of this is on a longer timeline than others, but those would be four areas where I'd look at and say "Well, whoever manages to incorporate those new phenomena, those new behaviors into their business model and create interesting content around them, those are going to be very, very valuable companies soon enough."

Portable Lessons from Gaming
Patrick: [00:53:52] I love the four categories and it begs one final question, which is, if we think about all these examples of games and gaming being sort of at the edge of technology of business models, it seems like they're always at the forefront, is there anything in closing that you think is especially portable about the cutting edge video game companies of today that should cause other non-video game companies to take notice and maybe consider applying those business strategies in other industries?

Joost: [00:54:21] I would say something like this, the games industry has always been on the fringes of entertainment. No one cared. It was, for the longest time, the category of entertainment that was bad, politicians would use it to demonize behavior and say, "Look at all these violence coming from these games," blah, blah, blah. And so, the game industry has always been on its back foot. If you look at it culturally, it's starting to change a little bit now, but for as long as I've been in the industry, which is now coming up in 20 years, unlike Hollywood and unlike the music industry, there's not a lot of red carpet events. Just from a personality point of view, the games industry at the top, and I talk to people that have been part of these billion-dollar franchises as much as I do to indies and starting designers through my class at NYU. What they all have in common is that they check their ego at the door. It's such a cliche and something, but from a culture industry, for an industry that's by its very nature, something that's built on people being extroverted and having a story to tell or having an idea to transmit and communicate to other people, they don't really do it for the sake of their own celebration. They don't really want to necessarily recognize and stood out in a crowd. And so, the games industry, culturally and individually, as I experience it, have always been sort of the quiet kid in the back of the room tinkering away. And it has retained a lot of that character.

So if you see a Tim Sweeney, so I met him briefly two years ago, he looks like the programmer that's been sitting in the corner in a windowless office for the last 20 years. Right, he wears the cargo pants. He has a big backpack, a dorky-looking fellow. That guy's a billionaire. And he has a vision for the world, and he's been doing it since he was a kid too. And I think he personifies in so many ways sort of what really makes this industry tick is that there is this modest genius that operates it behind the scenes whereas so many other entertainment industries, it's all about the fanfare and the flashy lights and, "Oh, what did Kanye wear yesterday?" And like, "Oh, let's talk ab..." Who cares? There's no TMZ for games. So, that absence, I think, of ego in everything that you do, and I say this also as an entrepreneur if you're able to let that go, if you're able to just focus on the problem, if you're able just to focus on building cool experiences, I think long-term, that is far more interesting than your 15 minutes of fame. And I think from a financial standpoint, it's just much more interesting long-term to invest in companies like that.

So, that's how I would personally always evaluate people. You just look at the management team and the seniority and their ability to get shit done, but really just the cadence of their ego. So, that would be my lesson. If you are in a different entertainment business, if you could just tone it down a little bit and actually just do your job as a musician and do your job as a marketing manager for a film, I think that that's one of the lessons I would take from the games industry.

So, that absence, I think, of ego in everything that you do, and I say this also as an entrepreneur if you're able to let that go, if you're able to just focus on the problem, if you're able just to focus on building cool experiences, I think long-term, that is far more interesting than your 15 minutes of fame. And I think from a financial standpoint, it's just much more interesting long-term to invest in companies like that.

Patrick: [00:57:04] Well, yes, this has been just a fantastic tour through what was a little niche thing now is a massive enterprise value industry in the entire world and lots of things to take away and think about. The closing question that I ask every guest is to ask what the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you is.

Joost: [00:57:21] My company started really with this wild idea because I wasn't sure what to do. I had just come out of grad school and I had sort of lost my own way. The thing is, is that you grew up in a world where you end up thinking about how to be in that world. So, you start a business. Do you take a job? Where do you go from here? One of the kindest things that anyone's ever done for me was a doctor at Columbia University. So, I was diagnosed in 2007 with cancer. It was her, I won't say her name because I don't want to embarrass her, but she was the one who said, "Look, you need to go get this checked out and you need to upgrade your insurance. And if it's nothing, then you'll spend a little extra money. If it's something, then you're going to save yourself a whole rigmarole."

So, I went through a whole medical thing for like a year, costs hundreds of thousands of dollars, which I didn't pay because she told me to think about this. And it wasn't so much about saving the money, but it was about someone who's like, "Let me look out for you." And so, since then, as I was starting to think about what to do, I always try to honor that idea of what's best for you. And I think it's, in building businesses or talking to my students, going through the pandemic over the last semester, I try to kind of channel that, pay that forward, by saying like, "Let me just empathize with your circumstance a little bit and how can we be together?" But that was really such a helpful, beautiful person to help me at that moment. So, that was one of the kindest things back then, which was meaningful to me.

Patrick: [00:58:44] Wonderful. Very unique answer. Some of these start to cluster around similar answers and that one's quite distinct and unique. I love the story. I've loved our conversation today. Thank you so much for your time.

Joost: [00:58:53] Likewise, man. Nice to meet you, Patrick.



Created by @ekmokaya

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
