
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released August 25th, 2021
Invest Like the Best
Renata Quintini, Roseanne Wincek - Investing at the Supercritical Stage
Renata Quintini and Roseanne Wincek are co-founders and managing directors of Renegade Partners. We cover their investing philosophies, what it means to invest at the “supercritical stage” in venture, and what worries them most in search of businesses with outsized potential returns.

00:00:00
01:01:46
Introduction
Patrick: [00:03:09] My guests today are Renata Quintini and Roseanne Wincek, co-founders and managing directors of Renegade Partners. Before launching Renegade, Renata and Roseanne were partners at high profile VC firms Lux Capital, and IVP. During our conversation, we explore their careers and what led them to launch Renegade. We cover what it means to invest at the super critical stage in venture and dive into a variety of topics around this theme. We then discuss their investing philosophies more broadly covering what best in class talent pipelines look like, what quality revenue means to them and what worries the most in search of businesses with outsized potential returns. I think this episode highlights that even as competition in venture has intensified, the best VC partners can offer more than just capital. I hope you enjoy my conversation with Renata and Roseanne.

Inspiration for Renegade Partners
Patrick: [00:03:57] Roseanne and Renata, right before we hit go here, we were talking about this notion of starting a new investment firm. Both of you came from story careers and really well-known well-respected investment firms, but you chose to opt into sort of a blank slate to create an investment firm from scratch. Which must be a really interesting thought exercise because you get to choose all the variables. I'd love to hear from you both what that process was like. And in going through that thought exercise, what was brought with you from your prior firms and what based on the conditions and your team are new and different on top of that blank slate.

Renata: [00:04:33] So I actually started my venture career investing venture funds for the Stanford Endowment in a weird period of time. It was 2007. On one hand, we were preparing a $2 billion sale of illiquid assets because it was like global financial crisis happening over expos to privates, liquidity, all that stuff that we read in the news, on one hand. And on the other hand, there was this trend of like these micro VCs or angel investors that were actually going institutional knocking on the door. And here there's something changing in venture and Stanford as one of the, if not the best venture portfolios in the world is a brand that gets to see all that. And I was managing the venture portfolio for Stanford back then. And it was okay, you had the Andreessens, the Founders Funds, the Felicis, Floodgates, et cetera, knocking on the door and saying, there's something new here. We're raising a fund. And that question of, okay, why does the world need another venture firm especially for a venture portfolio that was so built out like Stanford was very salient.

And the big aha back then is, you actually need to look at what's changed for founders and product market fit became a completely different game overnight when you had the collusion of okay, less cost to start because of AWS. You have global distribution channels with Facebook, Google, et cetera. And you also have the rise of mobile computing. So all those things meant you could now be in business with 500K a million bucks, et cetera, but that meant you had so much less time and more competition to figure out, okay, am I building something that people want to buy? If you actually kind of go back to the early days of the Andreessens, First Rounds, et cetera, it was really like, okay, either builders or people who knew how to sell or people who really kind of met founders in that really new need for them, which is like, can I build something the world needs?

So that spoke a lot higher than just money and the old stablish brands. And it was actually a really important inspiration for us to start Renegade. What is it founders need that it's beyond money? From there actually joined Felisa. It was three of us investing in what was a startup venture capital firm. It was almost like the beginning of a bad joke as a Turkish, Brazilian and Indian didn't enter a bar. It was the three of us starting back then. And it was a very privileged experience because we had institutional LPs. I had been in the best VCs. So we were a startup yes, but we had the oversight of the best possible board, the best possible standards.

So we had to graduate and grow up really fast. And I was there for seven years, raised four funds. I had the biggest takeaway that I had from my career there. And my experience there was, there were so many people that had that really fixed model of ownership or fixed model, I only do 5,000 checks or 700 or whatever. Those adages or heuristics and what we took the big step back, because like no, we're looking for number one outliers. And number two, if actually think that you can be a cash on cash big outlier winner, expanded definition of early stage. Go chase companies that can really drive that outlier power law return. Don't get so caught up in the semantics of it. And that was amazing operating system building for me as an investor and a lot of the stuff that we do here at Renegade.

And then from Felicas, I went to Lux. I've known the Lux team since the Stanford days, and it's a really, really unique place because I wanted to see how company building is in frontier because markets are obvious. They're deep, they're large. And it's not the question of adoption. Is the question of, can you build it? And can you build a company around the technology that you built? And it's a completely different ballgame than execution in traditional markets that we already know. And it was while at Lux that the inspiration or the crispness for what we wanted to be the Renegade really came. Even in edge markets, we saw a lot of velocity in customer adoption. We saw a lot of velocity. And once you have something that the market wants to buy revenue scaling, we saw a lot of capital chasing opportunities earlier and earlier, but then when you look under the hood, what did these companies look like from a team perspective, from a organization perspective? They were very raw compared to where their revenues were and we saw that time and time again. And then the investor acumen in us as like, okay, there's something here let's kind of spend time thinking about that.

Patrick: [00:08:30] Can I just make sure I understand the cool opportunity or new area of potential focus? I think you call this a super critical stage. I'd like to define that in a lot of detail, but this twin concept of it's easier to get started because of AWS and global distribution and mobile compute and all these other things. And therefore it's probably easier to get to X million of revenue or something. But the problem that that creates is growth hurts and growth is painful. And you can get ahead of your skis in terms of the business scale, but not with the support structure to be able to go to the next level. Am I understanding that you said meet founders where they are and that's something uniquely new about this landscape that we're in?

Roseanne: [00:09:08] I mean, the thing is, is that today tech outcomes can be bigger than ever. We have $4 trillion plus companies, right? They're all tech companies, we see $10 billion plus IPOs as a pretty new normal. And that's exciting, that's this amazing opportunity. But frankly, because it's also easier to get started, and also the way the public markets are structured today, you need to be bigger than ever to be really successful. And the truth of the matter is, in order to be that amazing $10 billion CEO, you've got to build a big company too.

One of the things that we would see with repeat entrepreneurs, for instance, the things that they were really getting right was about that team. And what we were also seeing, especially me, like I was a growth investor at the time, seeing these amazing companies, incredible financials, products people love flying off the shelves and to Renata's point, the organizations would be really raw. And the conversation was always like, oh, we're going to hire a chief people officer, and we're going to figure all that out. And it'll just take a really long time to hire that person. And there would just be mistakes made along the way in your typical growth company. And kind of the conversation that we started having around our company's support model was really around how do you help companies lay that foundation early on so that they can go and raise those giant rounds today and really deploy and scale.

And frankly, since we've had this idea and now been running with it, frankly, that issue is becoming even more acute because today there's so much capital in the system and you see this too. It used to be the number one in the market would at least have like a capital raising advantage because everybody wanted to be the best company. But now you see that the number ones, two and three are all able to raise these giant rounds of capital. And so now capital is even more commoditized. Everybody has access to so much money that puts the onus even further on execution.

And so for us, it was around, we saw that there's this new, we call it a new shade of gray to the early stage, like this idea of super critical, which is there's a product in market kind of that early revenue, early customer, lot of things are starting to work, but it's not that repeatable, scalable go pour growth dollars in. It would be like, it was hard to do, really hard to do as a growth investor, but not that pure play series A or pure-play seed. And we saw that because the outcomes are so much bigger and because the lifetime of these companies is being stretched out, now there was this new phase.

And to Renata's point about the rise of seed 10, 15 years ago, that created a new set of problems. And that was a giant opportunity for new firms. We believe the same thing is happening. Now that outcomes can be so large, that's this incredible opportunity for all of us. Technology gets bigger and bigger every day. But because of that, there's a bunch of new challenges. And frankly, I think as was a new firm or uniquely we've kind of had this link slate opportunity to go after them and to really help companies navigate this.

The Supercritical Stage
Patrick: [00:11:49] What are the most common mistakes that you see in supercritical stage? So you mentioned just hire a head of people and assume that will solve the problem. That kind of gives you a bit of a lens into what's going on, but what sort of itemized, what are the biggest errors that you see companies make that had they just been a little smarter about it they'd be better set up for the future?

Roseanne: [00:12:08] I think one of the most common ones, and that seems like not a big deal, but then can really kind of compound itself is just around titling, especially in the early days. Titles are free. Everybody can be the head of something, then you can make those heads of more narrow. But then when you really do want to grow up and bring in those very experienced executives, it just creates a lot of friction because if I was recruited with a VP title, then I go and I hire somebody who's really a VP. That person feels strange coming in and seeing their peer being not at their level. And then are you going to take that VP title away from me? And I might be a great member of the team, a culture carrier, driving awesome results, but maybe I'm not a VP. I was given that title because it was a way to attract me and entice me to join something early without a ton of compensation.

There's tittle kind of things like that around how do you get tight on titling and roles early on so that you can kind of set up to scale rather than trying to blow everything up and start over. And also things around our firm writes a lot about things like fair pay and compensation. How do you actually install those things early so that you don't have to... You're not doing these pay equity audits, that frankly are very time-consuming and nobody likes to them. They're not happy, and you ended up having to go back and change a lot of people's compensation. And that just really is not a good motivator.

Patrick: [00:13:24] Anything you'd add to that, Renata? Common mistakes that you see kind of in this stage.

Renata: [00:13:28] The big paradigm shift is the role of human resources in a company. I think very few leaders treat their people as the same way they would treat a product meaning with the right care, with the right iteration, putting the right systems and processes in place. And I don't mean applicant tracking systems or things like that, but really thinking about, okay, what are my business objectives? What kind of skillset do I have today in my org? What are the skill do I need to bring in? What's the timeline for that?

What is the experience level and what does that mean in terms of the cash I'm going to need to hire them, the equity pool I'm going to need to hire them? How do I actually build an org product that scales without hiccups? And this is what we're seeing. It's a lot of hiccups because you're just being reactive.

A lot of firms equate HR to hire or HR to don't get me sued. It is paperwork compliance rather than the super strategic function that helps you achieve your business objectives. Because if you look at, especially in the earlier stages, where does the capital you raise go? There's people in marketing or acquisition or some stuff like that in some R&D, but it goes every time. And now that the way people work has changed, what people expect from their jobs has changed. If you look at any compensation survey or work survey, salary is not the number one. People want to look at career progression. People want to look at learning. People want to look at building. The average tenure of an engineer at a startup now is 14 months.

So how does that mean for equity grants for how do I train these people that are going to have a shorter longevity in my company? Or how do you really build those assets and enable them to help you continue to grow?

Patrick: [00:15:07] You mentioned this idea that kind of zoned in on a specific sort of help that Renegade might bring to a new company. It begs the question when you're first approaching a new business. And you mentioned you like to see revenue, but maybe sometimes you'll go down to see, like, what are the key things that you are looking into first to evaluate whether or not just that it's a good business, but that it might be a good business for you in terms of what you bring to the table?

Roseanne: [00:15:31] I think that's been really fun and exciting about all of this is Renata and I started working on this kind of around this time in 2018 on ourselves and what we would do and had all these hypotheses. And some of them have changed and some of them haven't, but now that we get to talk to and invest in founders, the most fun part has just been when we do talk about our idea of the super critical stage and how this phase of life is different and why we focus on a phase of life, not a specific round of capital and kind of this hair on fire issues. And frankly, the companies that are doing the best or are struggling with the most, it's like a very fun problem set to go after in that way because it's not like you're trying to fix companies where things aren't working. Helping companies that things are working so well, but their hair's on fire. We see a lot of frankly CEO self selection.

There's a lot of folks we talk to and their eyes get wide and get super excited, and they're like that is me. Or even we get randomly cold emails from very legitimate founders or introductions saying like, oh, I saw this and this resonated so much. So kind of how we define the super critical stage is about a million dollars a month to about a million dollars a year, generally 20 to 100 employees raising rounds that are between 15 and $50 million. And what's interesting is we've done a bunch of deals and they're kind of evenly distributed between A's, B's and C's because the letter just tells you about the financing history, not about where the company actually is and what the upside potential looks like. So when we think about that sandbox, we like to see some early revenue, some early data, but frankly like when we're digging into these companies and what we really think is the most important is seeing that customer love. I know we love doing customer calls.

We're doing our internal superpowers exercise right now, which is something we can also talk about on the company support side, but talking to people who love and use the products. And frankly that's a much better proxy than trying to figure out what magic number is right now, or sales efficiency or scalable ramp time is. These companies are still really early and they're still just a ton of noise in the data. Knowing companies are going to be excited about the work product really, we have this amazing operating partner when we really start digging into companies. We involve her in the process and let the CEO or founder spend time with her. And it's a very good indicator. The folks who lean in are really excited about that conversation and really take a lot out of it or try to hire her from us are generally good. It's definitely a good leading indicator that they're excited to work on these things. And there are great companies where founders don't want very hands-off investors, but frankly in our years of investing, it's the ones that are open to influence and collaboration and talking to other execs and expertise that really do the best. And so, frankly, that's kind of built into our process.

Internal Superpowers & Decision Making
Patrick: [00:18:00] I have to ask both about the internal superpowers thing and also about the difference in conversation that your operating partner would have with a CEO than the one that you would have. We'll go in that order, suss out this idea of internal superpowers. What's that?

Roseanne: [00:18:11] So our operating partner has been working on this thing that she calls founder role design, and it's all about finding your flow and your play and right, there's all this soft data. And there's the kind of research that you're more productive, you're more efficient, you're more creative when you're in flow or you're doing things that you really enjoy. And we also think it's not only looking for flow, but also like, what are your superpowers? What are you really, really good at? And I actually think doing this work at this stage of company is so powerful because if you can help a founder kind of figure out their role and how it changes because every day these people are waking up and they're running the biggest company they've ever run. And in the very beginning, you're blocking and tackling and you're setting up the bank accounts and you're doing every job. And then as the company grows, you start to focus more and more. I think at this stage, it's a really great time to step back and say hey, what do I like to do? And what am I really good at?

Because then you can design the executive team around that founding team to support that. Because I mean, we have a founder who was running a CRO search and it was not moving super fast. And introduced them to our operating partners, spent some time with him. And one of the things that came out of that conversation was that he was like, oh, I actually love closing. I'm not looking for a CRO because I don't want to go to those final meetings. They sell the big, big enterprise to this day. There was a lot of CEO sales because you're a young company, right? To go sell to a big established company. Often the CEO has to show up, but he actually loved that. He loved getting to interact with customers and he loved sharing the product. And so really that actually changes the type of CRO that you want because you don't need a closer. The company already had a great closer. Instead it's about, he needed somebody who could really build and that scalable repeatable organization and who had done that piece before, but not the closing piece.

And so it's really so important about how you identify your own superpowers, what you really are great at and love to do so that you can compliment the things you are not good at. And so we're having an offsite next week and we're doing this for ourselves around our own process. What do we like to do? And what do we hate? And frankly, that will also tell us about how we need to build our team.

Patrick: [00:20:06] What do you like to do? For each of you, what is that? What's the flow state?

Renata: [00:20:11] I grew up, I fought karate and I play music. And a lot of those two things is observing what's around you, what's changing and using momentum and building on. So I love looking at trends, reading the tea leaves, kind of thinking big ideas and connecting the dots of problems that need solution or companies that are being built, but what are business engines that work out and what's gaining momentum and what's not. I just love that, that combination of just listening and deep thinking and observing of trends.

Patrick: [00:20:43] Roseanne, what's yours?

Roseanne: [00:20:45] Before we got work married, we hired a coach and we did a bunch of jokingly call it marriage counseling. But we spent a bunch of time thinking about who we are, what our values are, how we compliment each other. And it came out in that work that I was like a little bulldozer.I put my mind to something and it's like, nothing stands in my way. Whereas Renata is much more of like a surgical ninja. She's observing and waiting for her mark and pouncing, whereas I'm just full speed ahead. Actually, our coach shared with us, it's like, oh, that's fine. Just remember sometimes you're a big bulldozer, Renata is your little scooper and just bring her along with you. I also love selling and kind of hunt in the deal. I think we're very lucky too.

Patrick: [00:21:22] The bulldozer and the ninja.

Roseanne: [00:21:23] Exactly. How we actually compliment each other and actually frankly, how we celebrate that. I know it was Annie Duke who introduced us. We work really closely with Annie and it's funny because Annie loves to do pre-work or, we send her kind of anonymized answers ahead of time. And she always knows who was who because I'm the aggressive pessimistic one and Renata is the more conservative optimistic one. And she's like, it's great because I mean, that's actually ideal. If we were both really aggressive or both really optimistic, that would be bad. Instead we're very good foils to each other. But frankly, you have to recognize that and celebrate that as a positive, not a negative because sometimes I'm in bulldoze mode and Renata is the voice of reason. And it is very annoying because I just want to keep going and she's pumping my brakes for me. And in the moment that's frustrating, but in the grand scheme of things, thank fucking God.

Renata: [00:22:13] Why are we doing the super powers work? Going back to blank slate, we wanted to build the golden state warriors venture. We all have our own strengths and our own skills. We're here to serve founders. We really believe that this idea of what are the things that we can do to bring leverage to them? And we saw this people function as like a big first area of big leverage for them. And then how do we bring out the best in each other? So that is a lot around understanding our styles or personalities, what our strengths are professionally and personally, all of those things that also implies what are the incentives we bring our at our firm so that we're always preserving the outside view.

So that we're always putting the process and the decision and that first kind of checking our egos at the door as much as possible. So it doesn't matter who scores the point as long as the point gets scored or the ball gets blocked that piece of it. So we have spent a lot of time thinking, okay, equality on the GP side, making sure that we have executives that our companies would kill to have, but that they also have a voice and they also have a responsibility inside our company. And they can actually not only do their work with the portfolio companies, but also feel like they're helping us build Renegade, which they absolutely are. How can we use technology and data to better learn about our decision? So we have somebody who's our head data engineer that is doing a lot of stuff, not just on sourcing, but also in our decision processes.

We do a lot of pre-mortem on deals. We do a lot of scorecarding. We do a lot of, okay, let's understand how much do we know the market and how are we good or not at super forecasting things? The superforecaster book is actually on the welcome Renegade kit along with other books. All of these things, they matter a lot to who we are and how we're going to continue to deliver consistent returns to our investors.

Patrick: [00:23:56] Kind of putting process and quantification around the decision making process. You've mentioned customer calls a few times, which are inherently qualitative. There's kind of a feel to them. Say a bit more about what you've learned about making those effective and useful, especially in the more structured framework decision making process. What is a good customer call? How do you get better at doing those calls? Because those seem really important.

Roseanne: [00:24:18] They are very qualitative and frankly the best funds are even kind of the most volitive because you get off script. But what Renata was kind of mentioning about score-carding we do really try to standardize a lot of our reactions and decisions, even though if it's reactions to a meeting with a CEO or a meeting with a customer for a couple of reasons, A, so they're comparable against one another and then also B, for information discovery. It makes it actually much faster and efficient to pull out the nuggets. And so it's about, how do you actually structure them so that there is repeatability? And then also, how do you kind of think about what are everybody's incentives here? And especially when I think about customer calls, thinking about, who is this person?

And what's their role in the org and how does this tool or product change that? And especially one thing that I love and that you see as we've invested in a lot of companies over time, both on the consumer and enterprise side that are helping people excellent. Especially when you see things that help people be excellent at their jobs.

If you can find a piece of technology and bring it into your organization, and that helps you become a hero, that is so compelling, I feel like when products can figure that out, it's kind of like liquid gold. You will get the internal champion. Often, if that person moves to organizations, they'll bring your product with you. They can't imagine living without it. And I think it's all about how do you kind of tease that out about the people that you're talking to? Is this something that is fine or is kind of better than the status quo or is this something that you're really excited about it and makes you a hero? And so we always try to tease those pieces out.

Patrick: [00:25:42] One other similar question on the, you mentioned earlier the operating partner conversation with the CEO, how is that, Renata, distinct from conversations you'll have? Why have that as back to the process? Why have that as part of the process at all?

Renata: [00:25:55] It serves two purposes, one is it gives the CEO an opportunity to actually see how it's like to work with Susan and make it a very specific, what is top of mind for you conversations? So for example, there was one company that is in our pipeline that we were talking to that the conversations with me were all around scaling the business and opening up new geographies and talking about revenues and marketing and margins.

When Susan came into the conversation, the CEO went and said, okay, I'm going to be now national, but I'm really thinking about how do I treat customer service? Do I have it on the HQ level or do I have hyper-local ones? And how should I think about it and how should I think about knowledge sharing? And how should I think about compensation, et cetera, et cetera? And then the CEO started opening up around, oh yeah, most of our returns is because things don't up in time versus this or that. So I really need somebody on the ground that can actually go and fix the redelivery problem in a day. So stuff that is details of the way the company operates that bubble up, but it's really not for discovery on our side, but for the CEO to just spar. And then Susan, she was the first GM of UberEATS in San Francisco. She launched a business here from zero to 100 million revenue in two years.

Then she went to Zoom, Pizza started as a operator finance, and then went to talent and culture from 30 people to 600. So she's seen a lot and she's grown a lot of types of disparate teams. Because if you think about those two businesses, it's fast scale national coverage, a lot of fast learning playbook and repeatability across markets that are different.

You also have all the way from people that cut and deliver food to people that are building robots and computer vision. So a lot of complex work relationships that are really, really valuable to our CEOs. So they get a taste for what it would be like to work with us. So, like Roseanne said at the beginning, it's a great self-selection tool for us.

Patrick: [00:27:46] What, on that note are the most largest differences between companies that you might've invested in sort of at the similar stage through the first couple of stops in your careers versus today? How are companies themselves the most different in this environment, given some of the changes in backdrops and tooling and competitive labor marketplaces, all of these things have been changing? So how would you define what makes current companies distinct relative to the past?

Roseanne: [00:28:12] I had the masterclass for meeting yesterday when I was in there, I was thinking it was 2017. It was a series C. And how different the series C company is today from that. Just seems like our ecosystem has matured so much. One of the things that you see as also a lot of standardization across companies around tooling, everybody's on Slack, everybody's on Zoom, everybody's using the same stack.

I think that your average startup employee today is much more sophisticated about what it's like to join a startup, like a tech company and frankly ask better questions. I remember before I was a VC, I was a startup person. And I remember when I became a VC and explaining to so many of my friends about number of shares don't mean anything. It's a made up number and the questions that you need to ask. Nobody knew that back then, like 10 years ago. I also remember when I first started as a VC and people would be like, what was the post of your last round? And people would tell us. And I was like, oh my God, did that used to be a secret? Coming from the other side, you never knew what companies were really valued at. I know employees do. You see just so much more sophistication there. And frankly, I think it's for the better because people understand what they're walking into.

I remember I had a friend who was at a very early to company that ended up was a big high flyer and then struggled. And they ended up raising a lot of debt and nobody on the employee side knew that that sat on top of everybody's equity. They didn't understand the capital structure. And I think people are still a lot more sophisticated about that today, and frankly that's better. And also, I think cultures have grown up too. You obviously still hear stories of bad stuff happening, but it's not the wild west in the way it used to be. And I think that's a lot better because I was a female product manager a long time ago, and that was not a fun place to be in the world. And I think those experiences are pretty different.

Best-In-Class Company Characteristics
Patrick: [00:29:54] You mentioned earlier this sort of people function and the human capital function you've mentioned it's just there again. What do best in class companies share in common here? Because it feels to me like we're in this market where everyone's biggest challenge is hiring. It's an incredibly tight labor market for technology companies, really for any fast growing company. It just seems incredibly difficult, almost like you need as much of an edge there as you do in product or in distribution to be successful. What's going on there? What does best in class look like in your opinions for companies that build good talent pipelines that have good ahead of people? What's the gold standard?

Renata: [00:30:32] It first starts with a really crisp understanding, okay, what is the talent that I'll need and when? and they actually do a 12, 18 month plan type of thing. They think about, okay, how do I get leverage in my job? Where do I put the right buffers in the org? And they're really crisp too about, okay, what is the exact job that I want that person to perform? Not just a title, they kind of know the play way in advance and they will start recruiting. Okay, this role usually takes six months to recruit. So I'll start in the right amount of time. I know exactly what I'm looking for in terms of skills. I know what that person will do, all of that. They're really crisp on the actual recruiting process. You'd be surprised at how many of the companies fumble or in terms of not being aligned on the questions that they're asking or what are the skills that they are actually probing for, giving the employee not a great recruiting experience. You're selling your company to them. You need to be able at every checkpoint to be consistent, be aligned, show the right vision. Also understanding of the job, was really frustrating for an employee when they go from one interview to the next. And it's like, okay, didn't that other person just... I gave all that information already. What are you talking about? That stuff, you'd be surprised it still happens a lot.

Roseanne: [00:31:45] I have a friend who's going through a recruiting process and literally the COO and CEO of the company told him completely opposite things when it came to location of the job, who it reports to and what the responsibilities are

Patrick: [00:31:56] Blocking and tackling stuff, simple stuff.

Renata: [00:31:58] And then once the person is hired the onboarding and what is success? The 30, 60, 90 plan? What are the resources that person will need to be successful? I mean, some company would be surprised, they talk about onboarding, oh yeah, they'll have the laptop and then they start. It's a lot more than that. What's the information that they need to know? Who are they going to report into? What needs to happen that short period of time? And then also the best companies, they have an amazing way of being transparent and over communicate frequently about what's the company's vision. What are the business objectives? What are the goals? And how each function or how each cog ties into that constantly because you're making decisions of where you're spending your time or where you going to work all the time. And you much rather spend your time in things that move the most important boulders for than not.

So communication, especially when you have now more remote workforces, more asynchronous type of work and companies that continue to scale extremely fast. It takes a lot of communication and alignment and processes around that. Everyone in your company should be able to know, okay, what's the top three goals?

Patrick: [00:33:02] It seems like low-hanging fruit to make a company a lot better, but also in some ways like eating your vegetables versus working on product feels like eating a cookie or something. It's really enjoyable. It's tangible, the customer sees it.

And working on your internal people and systems, it seems boring is the wrong word, but it seems like work, necessary, but work that you put off. And I'm sure you see that all the time.

Roseanne: [00:33:26] I also think one thing I've just been reflecting on the past couple of days of just seeing companies that have very good, the gold standards offer acceptance rate, how many people that you asked to join actually joined.

Patrick: [00:33:36] Oh, interesting metric, yeah.

Roseanne: [00:33:38] And frankly, I think the companies that I've kind of been noticing this anecdotally, but I think that there's something there. I think of Masterclass, I think of Coda. I think of this company that we just invested in that it hasn't been announced yet. They're very clear and upfront about their culture and the process. And I think that A, attracts people who are excited about that type of culture and B, by the time that somebody has actually gone through the process, it's very clear to them what working in the company is like. And that I think really drives acceptance rate. Coda, I think is very good at this, right? Masterclass, I think is very good at this.

And to your point of the stuff is kind of like vegetables, defining your culture is squishy. And again, you also want to be thoughtful about diversity and bringing people in with different styles and backgrounds and experiences so that you get access to all of that brilliance. But how do you also communicate at the same time kind of who you are as an organization and what your working style is like and how warm and friendly or workman like your culture is? And I think the companies that are very good at describing that it pays for itself because we've got people who don't want that. We see a lot going on right now with companies coming out and saying, we don't talk about politics and that's for some people, it's not for others. But frankly, by just saying that out loud can help. A lot of people say, oh, that's not for me.

Patrick: [00:34:51] So basically reasons to opt in or opt out, even if they're controversial can be productive.

Renata: [00:34:56] Correct.

Roseanne: [00:34:57] Yeah, helping people know what it's going to be like. That's what success is.

Patrick: [00:35:00] You mentioned a few companies that I know. Maybe we'll start with Coda since I've had Shishir on the podcast before, and I'm a big fan of his incredible ability to structure narratives and process inside of a company. It's kind of unmatched actually. And the game I'd love to play is to go through some of the companies that you've invested in and have some experience with and just hear what you've learned about business in general, or about an industry or segment in which they operate. And maybe we'll start with Coda since it's one I know a little bit better than some of your other portfolio companies. What have you learned from Coda the business, Shishir as a leader and having spent time with that company?

Roseanne: [00:35:37] One of the things that I really love about the way that he operates there now are all remote company. They've always been distributed, but they do their board meetings with the entire company can join because they're on video and they've always done that. And then they use all the Coda tools around the Dory and the chat and everything around this discussion. And as an investor, it's super fun to see because you actually get to see all of the inside jokes and the conversations going on inside of it.

They also do a ton of hackathons, which I feel like back when I worked in companies that you saw them all the time and maybe I'm just further removed. But basically getting to see inside how they iterate and how like they eat their own dog food around the Coda product, how much they use it themselves. And then how much of their own kind of company and culture or tooling that they put out for the world has been just awesome.

Renata: [00:36:27] Tying to the customer conversations, because we talked a little bit about that. One thing that was extremely impressive about Coda was not just the level of usage of their product, but the most important data. Businesses were really running their most important stuff on Coda. It takes system of record. Everybody talks about system, right? It takes that to a whole new level because you think about, okay, you're seeing other options for people to kind of use their data or share their data, how valuable or how critical this is. But when you're talking to customers, the most important data that are the livelihood of their business units or for their company are being run on that platform. There's gold there,

Patrick: [00:37:05] It's actually what we're building Colossus on top of. We did so because of having Shishir on and just getting curious about it, but as like a kind of almost no or low code operating system for a business, it's kind of insane what you can do on there.

Roseanne: [00:37:18] I remember Masterclass uses Coda and they use it for their kind of soup to nuts course design for everything from instructor kind of ideas and sourcing to course design, to shooting, to marketing. And if you think about that, that's what makes Masterclass masterclass. That's a special piece. And you can't buy an off the shelf piece of software for what makes you competitively differentiated. And so I just think that there's something that's so meaty and juicy there by allowing frankly business people who manage those processes that make the company unique to also build the tooling that actually runs it.

Patrick: [00:37:51] Do you think Masterclass portends more similar companies in the future that are almost of that sort of Netflix model of fixed cost content and subscription and ever deeper niches? Obviously focused on education or how to, in their case. Same question I had on Coda, I have a Masterclass. What about it has taught you more about business or the way things are changing?

Roseanne: [00:38:13] So both Masterclass and Coda they're really similar and that they were big audacious product investments upfront with the long-term view of kind of customer behavior. Coda operator didn't sell, for what? The first three years. By the time they publicly launched in 2019, right?

The product had been so deep and so powerful, which is very dissimilar from a lot of kind of that valley startup of building in public and just getting that MVP out and iterating really quickly. And Masterclass kind of the same way in a world of all the free YouTube content you could ever watch, investing very heavily and deeply into ultra high quality cinematic content that's going to be more immersive and more impactful. And so both of those founders kind of took that same bet that if you do something much better when you really invest in quality, that will differentiate you. I think what we're seeing in Masterclass, I think with the great unbundling we're going to see more streaming services.

But what I love about Masterclasses that so much kind of like ed tech up to that point was taking regular structures like college classes, degrees, grades, and putting them on the internet. And if you think about that, colleges and degrees and grades and all that, they were like technologies that were built to scale education. Because if you go way back when you think about Plato and Aristotle, you are a great master. You spend a lifetime amassing this body of work, you pass that work on to a couple of people and apprentice or children. And it's kind of very like deep one-on-one. I think that is a very human idea. And in order to scale that there became universities where you've got people together and then you copy universities all over the world and we can standardize by having degrees. Those are all just technologies to take that same kind of idea of taking the work of a master and passing it down. That's get all over the world. And I think I didn't really.. I always hated ed tech when I made that investment, but because they were just kind of taking those technologies and putting them online. And I don't think it was that compelling, but what I love about what David did is he kind of went back to that first principle and it's like, how do people really want to learn?

You don't want to learn from a professor that's been in a lab their entire lives. You want to learn from the person who's done this. That is so much more powerful. Actually understanding that path and understanding how they've changed their craft and actually done something that nobody's ever done before. And how do you actually create that personalized experience using the internet? How do you make it feel one-on-one? And so I think we're going to see a bunch of streaming services, but I think one of the things that masterclass has showed us is that, we've kind of been thinking about education all wrong. We love to learn. We're always constantly learning. And if you make that beautiful and cinematic and immersive, that's an incredible experience. And I think you see it today in the class, what counts as education. Chris Foss and negotiation, these real skills you can actually use in your life, not just kind of things that we think of as academics.

Patrick: [00:40:54] Renata, back to the ninja here, as you think about kind of the evaluation of the trends that you're seeing today, and capital's abundant. In many cases, you mentioned revenue is growing faster than ever. What does quality revenue mean to you? So even for something like a Masterclass versus something else or any portfolio company. When you're digging into an impressive revenue growth story, what differentiates high from low quality revenue as you're evaluating a business?

Renata: [00:41:22] t's a combination of stickiness. And what is that customer doing with that product? Because you can get one million in revenue, two million revenues in so many different ways. So one is kind of going deeper and understanding how core is that product on your process, especially in companies that don't have a lot of data on churn. Actually understanding the usability and the use cases of that. Does that really change the way you do? Similar to what we've said, with Coda, the business is run on Coda. So they didn't have a lot of turn data when we invested, but we had really high confidence in renewal. The other question that we also ask a lot about or we want to look at is pricing.

We actually spend a lot of time understanding is the value that somebody is paying for that product, are you supposed to over-deliver to continue to earn that number or you have a lot of room to grow? Does it feel cheap for customers or not based on what they're getting? And we tied that back to product roadmap. We tied that back to story. So many companies will say, oh, we're going to use X as a wedge, but we're going to expand. And you need to believe that our revenue would go from, I don't know, 10 bucks to 50 bucks because we're going to do X, Y, and Z. So those are very different in terms of quality and sustainability and actually the customer calls, especially if we ask a lot about wishlist from customers, what do you wish the product could do today that it doesn't? Is it in the roadmap? Is it not on the roadmap?

Is the customer feeling like the product is okay, but kind of clunky or are they feeling that they have this huge bargain? So you always want to have that bit of a margin there. The other piece too is thinking about, is your revenue associated with something that generates revenue to the customer, or is it a cost saver? Because what is going to allow you to continue to extract value as you go? And we always wanted to be associated or in businesses that the revenue is closer to things that generate more revenue. Because if you have to keep explaining the ROI on the cost saving, that is a lot more complicated to sustain. That's another piece. And also fining out is the person who's using the product different than the person that cuts the checks? What's the priority of the person that cuts the checks? It's all about incentives. So all of a sudden we see board level conversations change around trends where people start talking about, oh, packing when the whole Equifax thing happened.

All of a sudden the whole security became board-level conversation. And that absolutely became a priority for the CISOs or the technology officers at companies that maybe they weren't buying before and then they were. So then when you kind of seen these pickups of waves like that, what is the trend? Is it here to stay or is it just a point in time where the market will pull back from you and then pipeline will kind of retract? So understanding what's the incentive of the buyer. What you're trying to look for is things that they use case it is business routine. It is something that they already do, but once you kind of bring that product, you unlock superpowers. It's 10X, you don't have to change a lot. I have one founder that says you got to be one degree of weird. You change one thing that unlocks a lot, but everything else kind of stays the same that you're running their business on that product. And then you kind of build as you go. Those are the best revenues.

Patrick: [00:44:31] Roseanne, do you have another example? I think Coda is a perfect example of we pay Coda, I would argue way too little. So hopefully Shishir is not listening, way too little for what they unlock in a business. And as we grow, they unlock more and more. It helps us scale and we get an unfair portion of that upside or something based on what they enable. A lot more value created than captured, nice way of putting it. Is there another business that you've invested in, Roseanne, that you find that to be true that's a good example of focusing on revenue, which means growth or opportunity for the customer versus cost savings?

Roseanne: [00:45:06] We just invested in a company called Spec It in Denver that does kind of in context training for SAS tools. So a lot of like Salesforce and outreach, and they can go on top of any tool. But again, it's one of these things that I think they had a bit of a COVID moment of like, if you run sales ops or sales enablement, all of a sudden you need new ways to make sure that all your team has all the right materials, has all the right battlecards, is up to date on any changes in the process or tooling or training.

And so COVID kind of shifted that and made everybody have to think about what am I using. But that was one where as we dug in, it was one of these things where it was kind of creating that flywheel, like giving these customers more and more and more because now they had abilities to kind of look at sales performance across apps. And what did people who successfully handled this objection, what did they do versus someone else? And so kind of getting that wedge, but then over time, what we're seeing their customers, they were like bringing more and more and more people on it because having that contextual layer just makes everybody so much more powerful. When you're asking about good revenue and bad revenue, I think where that actually shows up is not necessarily the revenue, but it shows up in the cost of sales. Because how much you have to acquire that customer, if the product is better, it sells itself. I mean, and we see that in consumer all the time.

I invested in glossy at IVP, and then I saw a ton of D2C and Blasio was always phenomenal. They had this amazing community. And so they weren't totally dependent on the social channels to buy their customers. They could get them on their own. And also when they did do performance marketing, right? They knew that it was very efficient for their business because the products were so good. And what you see in a lot of other businesses is that CAC just starts increasing and increasing. And frankly that's because the product that you're selling isn't as good for those customers as it was for the ones that had cheaper CAC.

I think it's actually easier to show up on the marketing side because the truth is, if you feel like Coda is cheap and you're getting way more value for it, like you're on your podcasts talking to us about it, you're going to tell your friends who are starting this, right? That word of mouth is so valuable and that pushes down their CAC. And frankly, that just gets more revenue. And I think it's that contribution margin that's the value.

Patrick: [00:47:08] Yeah. You're both in the, I like the phrasing of the, what could go right business, the success of your fund in your investors will be based on in all likelihood, a couple massive winners. And so you have to always be thinking about how big could this be in the success case? Could it be even bigger than we dream? When you have that view of making investments, what are the things that scare you most when you see them? What are the things that make you think, okay, that sort of what could go right? Incredibly asymmetric outcome really isn't possible here for some reason. Negative screens, so to speak.

Renata: [00:47:41] I think one for me is the capital that it will take for the world to agree with us, because I think it's not just market timing is also like, okay, how much capital is it going to need? And what is the syndicates trend to kind of take it there? Because you need to stay in the game to win. And that is one that would talk a lot about. What are the metrics and will the market value the metrics the same way a company will? Because sometimes we may be unlocking things, I don't know, technologically or et cetera that are really meaningful, but from an outsider, from a business evolution, it's like, okay, man, I'm not going to value it the same way. So actually tying the milestones what's achievable, and how much is it going to take to unlock more so that the market will agree. That is one that we think a lot about.

Roseanne: [00:48:25] Even though we're investing in companies that have products in market that you can diligence and have financials that you can look out, these are still such early businesses and you're still betting on founders. And I mean, the hardest thing is if the founder can't scale, sometimes the product's amazing.

I want to invest in a company where we were, definitely the market. From a product stand point, we were the market leader. And we got smoked by CEOs that were better able to hire high quality talent to build better executive teams around themselves. So we kind of talked about the pre-screening thing at the beginning, right? It's like, what are those clues that this is somebody who can really level up and every day they're going to run a bigger, a bigger company and everything is great? Three years from now, you're going to be looking back at the board meeting and being like, oh my God, it was so little and cute and tiny right back then.

And so we're looking for those leading indicators. And that conversation with Susan is often a great one that help in how curious and passionate and open to influence are our people. When you see a founder who we can hire an executive that they have no business hiring when they can hit above their weight. Cat Lake, did that in such crazy spades.

Patrick: [00:49:23] Incredible, yeah.

Roseanne: [00:49:24] I mean, she's such an epic operator, but even like... I mean, I remember the first time she came in with Mike and it was just like, how did you get this guy?

Patrick: [00:49:32] The Netflix guy too, yeah.

Roseanne: [00:49:33] I mean, she attracted these amazing people. And so I think when you see that respect that I mentioned, they got this incredible head of sales, Rebel matched our most recent deal also got a much more senior kind of hire for their head of sales role than you would expect of the company at that stage. And then also I think looking for CEOs who are also very good at frankly relinquishing control and want everybody on the team to be better than them. I know that those kind of seem trite, but I've also seen it not happen. The example I used of getting smoked by the competitors, the CEO was just too held on to get great executives and let them run.

Robert Raskin, I think is phenomenal at this. I remember when we first invested, he said, I want to hire every smart... Or he's like, I want everybody to be smarter than me. I just want to like get out of their way. Or I remember when we hired a great COO at Compass back then and Robert called and he's like, okay, how do we break up my job? And his one request was he was like, oh, I want this one person to report to me because I get so much energy from working with him. That was the one thing. So when you see these founders who can hire and attract great people who let them run and let them shine, those are the ones that are really going to level up because you can't do it alone. Sometimes at the series A the CEO is the best executives and that's fine, but that's not going to be the truth at the D or the E or the IPO. And so you have to find a person who can navigate that as well.

Lessons & Levers for Success
Patrick: [00:50:50] If you think back to the beginning of your investing career, so think about the first 10 investments or five investments that you made relative to the last five. In what ways do you think each of you individually has improved the most and what has been the various catalysts for that improvement? Maybe Renata, we can start with you.

Renata: [00:51:08] I thought I needed to know a lot more than I actually did. You're never going to know more than a great founder. You need to know enough to understand the levers, what is important for that business engine or their market or whatnot. And then you let them be the expert and drive the vision and drive all of those things. And when I first started, I thought I had to be a lot more in it. A lot of our job is to kind of suss out do they understand what the important levers are of their business, and actually kind of triangulate things of, okay, for example, you're projecting your CAC to decrees 2X in a year.

Tell me how and see what is an outlier, good or bad. And then you kind of focus the conversation on that because the companies that really disruptive, they are going to be defying some stuff that you think, oh, it's not supposed to work, on the positive on the negative. So it's more about, okay, where do you kind of hone in the questions? Where do you spend time and how do you get intelligent enough to call BS or also suspended belief? Because you want to be surprised. I think that that's conceptually the biggest thing that's changed for me.

Patrick: [00:52:15] I love that one. Roseanne, what about you?

Roseanne: [00:52:17] Yeah, again, I think it's about like reading people. I think I'm getting better and hopefully I have a lot of work to do on kind of figuring out who are going to be great leaders that really scale. When I think back to very early in my investing career, I started my career at Canaan.

I was an associate and it was awesome because it's a very collaborative, very apprenticeship culture. And I got to see so many different deals with so many different partners and different styles and things like that. And one that has always stuck with me was that we looked at this company that had a famous founder who had started another company that was really successful, really cool tech. And the references were horrible, terrible. And the company went on and the guy did everything his references that he would do. And I feel so lucky I got to make those calls probably a year into my venture career and got to watch it play out in the news. That big lesson that I feel like I picked up on really early was like, when people tell you who you are, you believe them. If you have doubts about people going in, and if you think that it's going to be different now, I think like at the core, there's so much variance and noise, and this is all built on trust.

It's all about how can you find the people that you want to work with that you trust are going to do the right and the smart things because like nobody knows what the right answer is because these are unanswered questions. And otherwise these wouldn't be interesting novel companies.

Patrick: [00:53:31] What have we not talked about in our conversation today that you think is really important as a determinant to your success specifically at Renegade? Whether that's some unique way that you do things or just more generally speaking. Is there anything we haven't covered that you think is critical to how you think about the world and make your investments?

Renata: [00:53:48] No, I was going to say we really built an organization that will disrupt itself. We spend so much time thinking about what is knowable, what is our process? What are the important questions that can be answered today that we can ask a company? So what are we learning? And also kind of tracking to later go back and say, were these determinants? Are we asking the right things? We really have a crazy curiosity. We really want to win, but we build the culture, the systems, the incentives to kind of break it all. We're experimenting all the time, collecting feedback on decisions on how we're working together as a team.

We actually quarterly, we do this, how are we working together exercise. But we say, okay, what is working? What are the things that we're doing that are working? And what are the things that are not serving us? And we change the way we are doing things based on that. We treat our decision process, our working process as a product. And we're always iterating. We're always testing and we're always learning what the founders want. So even with Susan, we first invest, we have a conversation with a founder. What is top of mind? Then later six months we sit back and do a review and plan for the next sprint.

We run our companies like a company. We actually meet for sprint meetings every Friday. We do quarterly goals, tie back the sprint to goals and we have no personal pride in scratching things or say, hey, this didn't work. Or, hey, let's double down on this because this is working.

Roseanne: [00:55:17] At the end of the day, more money sales. We sell money. It's the ultimate commodity. And so for our investors, right? The only thing that makes them different, the dollars that we sell versus the dollars that other people's sell, are the decisions that we make. And that's driven by the culture that we build. And so to that end, we wanted to build a firm that looks like a company we want to invest in. And we very much think about decisions as a product. How do we instrument them? How do we measure them? How do we make sure that they get better? How do we make sure that we're doing things properly and thinking the right way about this and bringing in experts and learning where we can?

And I think frankly, in an industry where there's the Midas touch and the gut, and I just know, I frankly just think we have a big competitive advantage by believing that that's all bullshit because we know. There's been a dozen Nobel prizes about how we make decisions and how we are telling ourselves that we were smarter than we really were. And so much of the reason that we're doing this and so much of the long-term value that I think that we're building is just trying to be as objective and scientific and kind of instrumented as possible so that we can also keep the outside view and not think that we're so great and that we're the smartest people in the room because sometimes we will be, and a lot of times we won't. And we just got to do it better than everybody else.

Patrick: [00:56:27] The bulldozer and the ninja out there selling money. I love your story. I think the way you're going about building a new firm is really neat. It's been a pleasure to get to meet you guys and learn about what you're building. I ask everyone the same closing question, excited to ask it twice. Renata maybe I'll start with you. What is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Renata: [00:56:44] I think believe in me when it was impossible, because it takes seeing you for who you are and say you can do it when you think you can't or the world thinks you cannot. And when you think about the ripple effects of that one thing allows me to pay back 10 million kindnesses back. And I hope to do that.

Roseanne: [00:57:04] The first thing I went to were like, well, which one do I pick? Somebody who told me that I could do something that I wanted to do. I think about that a lot. My dad was one of those people who was always like, baby, you can do whatever you want, any job you want. And I was like, duh, of course.

But then he knew that I would grow up and go into the world and the world would tell me otherwise, because I was a woman or I am a woman. So yeah, all those people who kept going, I think about my parents and my thesis advisor and Maha, the first person who hired me in Venture.

Patrick: [00:57:33] Wonderful. Well, this has been so much fun. I've learned a lot. I really appreciate your time. Thank you so much for doing this with me.

Renata: [00:57:39] It's great. Thank you for having us.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
