
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released July 8th, 2021
Founder's Field Guide
David Velez - Building the Branchless Bank
David Vélez is the founder and CEO of Nubank, the world’s largest digital bank with over 40 million customers. We cover his venture capital background at Sequoia, the pros and cons of building a digitally native business, and what gets him most excited about innovation and technology in emerging markets.

00:00:00
00:56:43
Introduction
Patrick: [00:02:12] My guest today is David Velez, founder, and CEO of Nubank. The world's largest digital bank with over 40 million customers. In our conversation, David talks about his venture capital background at Sequoia and how that led him down an entrepreneurial path in Latin America. We also talk about the pros and cons of building a digitally native business, and what gets him most excited about innovation and technology in emerging markets. Before we start the episode, I'd also like to highlight our newest Colossus show, Business Breakdowns. Since launching in early April, we have published over 15 breakdowns and continue to release a new episode weekly. To learn more check out, joincolossus.com. I hope you enjoy my great conversation with David Velez.

Berkshire Hathaway's Interest in Nubank
Patrick: [00:02:56] David, I think an interesting entry point here is that fun and interesting one since the news was just announced that Berkshire Hathaway made a very large investment into your company. And you just told me that they're the largest bank investor ever. That's quite an interesting dynamic. Can you walk us through this story? Why do you think Berkshire was so interested in your business? How did this go down?

David: [00:03:16] To be completely honest, we never really considered him as a potential investor, as we seen him very actively investing in traditional banks and traditional incumbents. They're one of the biggest investors in Goldman Sachs with the financial prizes today, they're one of the biggest investments in Bank of America. They tend to look more at traditional incumbents in more mature industries. But we had a conversation with them a few months ago and they started digging in and they were very, very curious asking really, really good questions about the market size, about the unit economics of the business, about cohorts. Very thoughtful understanding of financial services and what we're doing here in the markets and how we're competing with some of the traditional banks in Latin America. In a few weeks, they were very excited and very willing to lead a round in Nubank. So for us, we see these and I think the market has perceived these a bit of the big validation of the business model, big validation of our ability to compete with traditional banks and eventually our ability to surpass traditional banks in the future of financial services.

Patrick: [00:04:26] What do you think are the most important differentiators between what we'll call the incumbent banks that maybe Berkshire invested in more traditionally, versus Nubank? What are the largest important differences for those out there, listening to understand?

David: [00:04:40] I think the first one is, the consumer obsession and a culture that is based on consumer obsession. I don't think this is necessarily specific to financial services. I think one common denominator of incumbent industries, either financial services, or if you look at insurance or even in media or transportation, is that after let's say six, seven decades of traditional capitalism, you ended up with a number of players, oligopolies, where four or five companies effectively own the market. Whenever you see another golf police structure, you find that there are abnormal returns and you also find a lot of complacency among incumbents. That complacency, ultimately ends up translating into taking customers for granted when it should be the actually opposite. Ultimately, you win because customers choose you. What you find in Latin America and a lot of emerging markets and a little bit of the US, is that there are five banks that have won, let's say banking 1.0, and they will become complacent and they forgot about customers.

There are a number of different things that we're doing differently. But I would say the number one is having a culture that is obsessed about customers and doing the right thing for the customers, from doing the right decisions, to giving the right customer service, to building products that are really actually good for them. I would say that's number one. Then there is all the tactical advantages that being a technology company at heart provides. Obviously from being a fully digital company and not needing to have a full offline distribution, very expensive backend branches, that allows us to have about 50X more customers per human, than traditional banks. Just being in total detail, we have one building here in Sao Paulo and have 40 million customers different 5,570 Brazilian cities in the Amazons, in the south, we have customers in Mexico city, obviously, and Columbia. That gives us a huge operational efficiency. Ultimately, that translates into significant cost efficiency, that we can pass to the end consumer via lower fees. We don't need to charge so many fees. We don't charge any fees. Then there's all the other advantages of being a tech company from a data first, analytics infrastructure, to be able to use a lot of data to make a lot of different decisions. All of these different advantages, add up to building a type of offering that is very hard for the traditional incumbents to match.

Company Overview and Origin Story
Patrick: [00:07:11] Maybe you could just level set for us, today in the markets where you operate, if I was about to become a new Nubank customer, what does that traditionally feel like? What is the model customer doing with you and how do they sort of get on board to begin?

David: [00:07:24] 90% of our customers come through word of mouth, completely referred by other friends. We've been really growing fully by word of mouth, no customer acquisition costs since 2014, when we launched. And our latest cohort last month, is exactly the same as our first cohort in 2013. It's been viral, which is unexpected for a financial services product. You don't see a credit card has no virality characteristics. There's no real network effects when you think about it. It's not Facebook. It's not Instagram, where if all your friends are there, you want to be there. Here, you will have a loan product that doesn't necessarily make it better for your friends. I'll provide a little bit more nuance then later on because in effect that's one of the things that we've done differently. But in general, most people will hear from us through a friend, will download the app or will be invited by a friend. The friend will send you an invitation via WhatsApp or email or Facebook or any type of channel. You accept the invitation. You download the app. And in a few seconds or a few minutes, you have a bank account open. You have a credit card, a virtual credit card working. We'll send you a physical credit card to your house in one or two days it's there.

Then you get access to a number of different products that we have. You can get an insurance product, you kind of start investing your money in a number of your funds, and also equities through Easynvest, a company we bought last year. If you have any questions, you can ask any questions via the chat that we have in our app. And all your interaction is fully digital through the app. The last thing I'll add is, one of the big pains in this market is, over 40% of the population are blacklisted in the consumer bureaus. They are outside of the credit system. If you want to credit, you do not pay the average 500% APR. You pay 1000% APR. Because there are a couple of institutions that will lend you money at that rate. Most traditional institution will not lend you if you are black listed in one of the bureaus. Just because there was no FICO score. There was no positive credit information, only negative.

I'll give you an example. In my case, I moved apartments and the cable company still send me a bill for $10 and I never got that bill. So I became a delinquent for them. They sent me to one of these credit bureaus. If I needed a loan from one of the big banks, I would have had been rejected. A lot of the opportunity here was for us to build new credit methodologies, build our own FICO, proprietary. Allow us to underwrite most of the population, both the banked and the better. One of the big variables in our model is, who invites you? Since 90% of our customers come through referrals, we use the credit information of their referral as an input into our credit model. It turns out, it is very predictive and it has allowed us to underwrite two people on lower costs that never had access to any type of credit product.

Patrick: [00:10:28] Completely fascinating that you could use that mechanism to build up data profile of people. It seems like I just got done doing one of these with the founders of Loft. Their story is so interesting in that it's kind of like the equivalent here, where there was no MLS, so they could build sort of a proprietary database and supply.

It sounds like you've done something similar, which is actually bring online and make legible the average person that just had nothing before. That begs the question, how did you do this to start? You've got all this data and all this referral now, but back when you began the service, maybe you could tell us the origin story. What did it look like? What was the original problem that you want it to solve? Why were you, with your co-founders in a position to potentially solve it?

David: [00:11:10] I come from the investing world as you do, but I always wanted to be an entrepreneur. I was working for Sequoia. I moved to Sequoia in 2012, they opened their office here in Brazil. After going around in circles for two years, trying to find interesting startups to invest, all of us came to this sad conclusion that there was very little technology in Brazil and Latin America. No interesting startups and didn't justify opening a Sequoia office in here. Me being Latin America and Columbia was very sad by that conclusion, but I do disagree. I was in agreement. There was no point. That was my cue to finally do what I always wanted to do, which was to start my own business. I told Sequoia, "I'm not going back to California, I'm staying here and I'm going to go on my own. I want to start something." I spent all this time looking at financial services. I was very curious of financial services because, it's the largest industry in Latin America. It's a trillion dollar market cap industry.

If you look at the largest companies in almost every country in Mexico, who are the largest companies? In Columbia, who have the highest market caps or Brazil, it's generally banks. In Brazil, five of the top 10 companies are banks. That's where most of the market cap of Latin America exists. I was curious about the overall size, curious about the overall profitability. Brazilian banks for 20 years have shown returns of equity in the 30s or 20s. That's 10X of what you find in the US or in Europe. That has been through all the volatility of macro in the good times, the bad times, you find very large grows and very good raise . I was interested about how just overall profitability of that industry. Then I had an experience personally, trying to open a bank account. when I moved here. When I had to go to a bank branch to open a bank account. And it was the most painful and frustrating experience I've ever had. It was going through that banking branch, I had to went through a bullet proof door. I had my cell phone in my pocket and so alarms started sounding because they were metal detectors.

Two police guards, armed, came running to see if I was somehow armed and trying to rob the bank. I had to leave back the branch, leave everything I own in a locker, go back into the branch. Waited 40 minutes to talk to a banking manager that had no interest in helping me. Anyway, I won't bore you with all the details, but it was a process of four months, of going to the banking branch several times. Sending a lot of information to finally get a simple bank account, a credit card, and having to pay hundreds of dollars in fees. That experience on one end, just didn't square with the overall market cap and profitability that I saw on the other side of that market. That all created the obvious question. Why isn't anybody competing with these big banks? Why isn't anybody providing a better experience? This seems like an amazing opportunity. The answer was, I spent a lot of time talking to the experts, to the CEOs to the consultants. The overall sense their conclusion was that, it was impossible. A lot of arguments as to why it was impossible, from the regulators will never let anybody in to this market, to these big oligopolies are too powerful. They control the governments. They have a lot of lobby. They will put a lot of barriers. And indeed there were a lot of barriers. Brazil is one of the only countries in the world where it's in the constitution. Imagine if in the constitution of the US, there was an amendment that said that no foreigner can invest in banks. That's what proceeding constitution has. That's the level of protection that the incumbents have enjoyed for a very long time.

About two months of doing a lot of homework and validating a lot of these arguments, I concluded that there was an entry point that could be a window of opportunity through mobile. This was 2012, where the smartphone penetration was starting to grow very fast in Brazil. Brazil has huge technology adoption. The speed of technology adoption in Brazil is one of the highest in the world. And got very excited about this opportunity and ultimately decided let's give it a shot. Let's see what happens and be on a fun ride. Let's see if I really get kidnapped by the incumbents or by the regulator. At some point, we just going to have to try. The only way to really validate is by giving it a shot.


 

Source: a16z

Patrick: [00:15:32] Before going into the next step in the story of how you built stuff initially, and got that first hook into the market, you mentioned this time spent at Sequoia studying FinTech businesses. What were the big lessons from that period? What in your mind, made for a great FinTech business, versus a good one or a mediocre one?

David: [00:15:52] At that point, this was 2011, 2012, the word FinTech didn't even exist. The industry didn't even exist. There was no studying FinTech per se. I studied a lot of technology companies though, and we looked at, Sequoia is obviously one of the best technology investors. I was very lucky in being able to sit in some of the best entrepreneurs speeches in Silicon Valley and sitting in the table of the Sequoia Investment Committee and hearing the partners on what were the things that they were looking for and why an investment made sense. There were a number of insights to how they make decisions and how did they ultimately decide to invest in a tech company. That I was able to learn into crafting the Nubank strategy. Those are some of the basic elements of a great technology company.

I'll go back to first that customer obsession, if you understand Amazon, or if you look at Netflix, or if you look at a number of different, great technology companies, consumer obsession is one of those first values. That was going back to what I said initially, that was one of the first values that we also instigated here. Especially in a market has so much scarcity as Brazil or Latin America.

The second point was building technology in house, really owning your technology, creating a company culture where the software engineer, is at the center of the strategy, and is as good as a culture as it gets to allow engineers to build the best work of their lives. Which in traditional incumbent industry, especially Brazil, banking is the opposite. You hear about the people from the IT that need to come in and do the work, and they're in a different building. And you barely even see them. They're not front and center. They are extras. A lot of the times you don't even build your own technology. It's always sorts of through a third-party company. There were two elements. Our elements were the way the initial team, the initial founding team is built, and the initial culture is built. One of the things I heard a lot initially at Sequoia was the initial success of a company was very much based on the culture. And that the culture of a company is set up in the first five to six months, with the first five to 10 employees. Sequoia looked carefully about the existing, the initial founding team and the initial five, 10 people. They asked questions around what the culture, how that culture is built. Because those initial conditions will tell you a lot about the next 100 employees you'll hire, or the next 1,000 employees you hire. And the values that you will create as a company.

One of the first things that I did at Nubank was, not only setting up a deck to fundraise, but then a culture deck that had all the values that we're going to have at a company. Then I was able to use that with my co-founders, that I went and recruited, looking for people that were very complimentary to me that were able to fill the gaps that I personally had professionally. I had a lot of different gaps that were going to be obstacles for me to execute this plan and use the deck to set up the basis for that culture, and then get those next 10 employees, which then helped us get the 100 employees on a very consistent basis. That'd be about culture that'd about technology, that'd be about focus on the customer were lessons that I took as an investor to then set up as Nubank in the initial days.

Patrick: [00:19:18] What parts of your personality and background bled into the culture most? You've got an interesting story in that you're Colombian by background. Your co-founders were, I think, Brazilian and American. It's kind of interesting hodgepodge you're building a company in Brazil. You came from Sequoia, you've got this really cool kind of melting pot background. How did your own history and story and personality, work its way into the culture?

David: [00:19:42] A great conversation I had with Roelof from Sequoia, when I was pitching him the Nubank story, Roelof has a lot of experience in financial services. He was director at PayPal. He told me something that was a punch in the stomach and ended up being incredibly valuable. He told me, "David, this makes a lot of sense. It makes a lot of sense, conceptually. Your background is very inadequate to be able to find an execute this business plan. You're not an operator, you're not a technologist. All you effectively have as a background, is an investor. You have a big mountain to climb. I always felt that, well, I left that meeting feeling hurtful. It was a bit of a punch in the stomach. It helped me a lot because the next step that I had to do then was, "Okay, fine. I have all of these gaps. How do I feel these gaps?" The first big gap was, I'm a foreigner in Brazil, I'm Colombian. I had no network. I was full immigrant. And I had never worked for a retail bank. I didn't really know how a credit card works, to be honest.

So the first step was, let's find the perfect insider, I was the perfect outsider. Let's find somebody that understands credit cards and is Brazilian, and has a huge network. I went and met a bunch of people and I met Chris, my co-founder, who's obviously with us. And she brought all that knowledge that I lacked. The second big gap was, we were building a technology company, not a bank. So technology was going to be in the center of the strategy. And I did study engineering, but I was not a computer scientist. I went and met a bunch of potential CTOs, co-founders and I met Ed and he was great to join us. He was responsible to the entire technology strategy and some of the big decisions since the very beginning. With those two co-founders, I filled some of the gaps. Then the mission for the next six months or 12 months, was actively asking the question, "What are all the other gaps? Then how do we find the best people to be filling those gaps? From knowledge of credit, to funding, to data science, to design, to marketing, to branding. Executing this entire plan requires so many different skillsets, that the value of diversity has been a big value from us and it's there in our deck, since 2013.

Even now, this is how we think about our architect in our entire organization. You are on Nubank, you'll find a ton of diversity everywhere you look. We have 35 different nationalities. We have people working in something like 25 countries today. We have people that speak something like 15 different languages. We have obviously a lot of introverts working next to extroverts. We have people that studied physics, sitting next to people that studied philosophy, next to people that studied communications. We love creating those teams with a lot of diversity, because ultimately, out of that diversity, out of conflict of ideas, that you can really come up with original insights. That's what a lot of the traditional incumbents, especially banks, don't get. If they really want to compete with companies like ours, they only need to overcome a technology challenge, but mainly a cultural challenge and a talent challenge. Because they're extremely homogeneous. You find these regional banks, 95% white males, all going to the same schools, all speaking the same way, all providing the same views about the world. And in that environment, it's very hard to have that type of conflict of ideas, because everybody really agrees with each other. I would say a lot of those decisions around team building and culture, came from a humbled recognition of a lot of weaknesses, and then trying to figure out how to overcome those.

Patrick: [00:23:27] I'd love to move from the weakness idea, to that of strength and the strength that it must've required for you to run through some of the walls put up literally in the constitution, as you mentioned, and just generally speaking. What was it like in those early days? Like what were the major walls you had to break down to just be able to offer service that you did to Brazilian consumers given the incumbency? It sounds like regulatory capture of the incumbent Brazilian banks. What were the big early obstacles?

David: [00:23:56] One of the things that we as a team had in the early days was, we were trying to go against the most powerful companies in Brazil. We have spent months hearing from everybody that it was completely impossible and almost ridiculous, what we were trying to do. I heard so many times, "You are not even Brazilian. You have no idea what you're talking about. It's impossible to go against these guys. You don't know these local." We were sharing the no and the skepticism so often from so many different people, that there was a huge sense of urgency to prove everybody wrong. To prove everybody wrong, just created this sense of urgency inside, that we had just had to find a way to make it. It was amazing. Create a level of energy and sense of urgency that forced us to ask why five times everybody told us that we couldn't do it. Even the bigger function. When we started working together about five months after, I knew that we were going to start with a credit card product as a first product. A new revelation came in, regulating that industry. This was something like November 2013 and the regulation said, "If you are not operational by April 2015, if you're not operational in five months, you're going to have to enter and ask for a license, and that process is going to take you two years." For us, that would have been death. That basically meant we have five months to build our entire product and be operational. We were forced to grab our roadmap and figure out a way to make it successful in half of that time. That meant that I remember a weekend, we had to be able to get MasterCard on board. They needed to get a piece of paper in their office, in the Netherlands by a Monday and DHL was not going to be able to deliver it by Monday. We considered just flying ourselves to the Netherlands, to be able to deliver it physically in the office of MasterCard, by the deadline on Monday, so that we could gain two days in the entire roadmap implementation.

The same thing happened with regulation. Every time somebody told us, "No, you cannot regulate it." We will go in and triple check and triple click. One of the first things we had, obviously the regulator we're going to hate what we were doing. We just went and checked. We went into a plane. We flew to Brasilia where the Central Bank is. We went and talked to all the regulators. We made a very honest case saying, "Regulators, you have five banks that own 90% of these markets and they're charging the highest interest rates in the world. You have 40 million Brazilians outside this banking system. How is this type of concentration good for Brazil?" And they agreed. They said, "It's not good. We want competition."

That was the first step where we started making the case, the education case that technology and smartphone, open window of opportunity for new entrants to provide competition that was ultimately going to really enable more Brazilian, to get more access to more products. They have become our biggest allies. And today their Central Bank of Brazil is very forefront. They're supporting competition. They're trying to remove all those barriers.

Sometimes we couldn't get any barriers removed. In the case of the constitution that I mentioned, it took us three years to get a banking license. We had to go all the way to the President of Brazil, to get out presidential decree, to create an exception for us to get a banking license, because we had foreign investors. At that point, we just had to be patient. One of the decisions that we made, especially there is, we have to just be compliant. We were not going to take the route that a lot of our technology companies have taken, which is grow very fast, but one point you will be so big, the regulator is going to be forcing to accepting you. Here, we decided we were going to be always compliant. We were going to be friendly with regulators. We were going to maintain good conversation with them. If it cannot happen in six months, we just have to be patient and figure our ways to provide products while being fully compliant with all the regulators.


 

Source: The Generalist

Patrick: [00:27:53] Is it fair to sum all this, the lesson here up as like, there is no trick to this. It's not a trick at all. It's to be transparent, to appeal to the fact that you're doing the right thing for a big customer base, and then to be patient? That's the formula for dealing with an entrenched situation with a lot of red tape. Is that a fair summary?

David: [00:28:11] Yeah, I would say first, it helps a lot when you're on this good side. Some of that you're in today, you're not in the dark side of the force, you're in the positive side of the force. You're the Jedi. Because ultimately, you have 200 million potential Brazilian consumers on your back, helping you. That's ultimately the best defense that you can have. From any lobby, from any politician, from any regulation. There was one change in regulation, in 2015, over a weekend. I remember it passed on a Thursday afternoon, that was being pushed by some of the incumbents, to make it very hard for us. Would have required us to over a weekend, raise over a billion reals, and would have probably put us out of business. We were very vocal through the weekend with the press saying, "If that regulation passes, we're dead. We're done." By Monday morning, the Twitter account of the Central Bank had 15,000 Brazilian customers telling the Central Bank, "You cannot do this. You have to protect Nubank. For the first time, somebody in the market is helping us and doing something good for us and you guys are going to come here and let this happen?"

To your question, I think beginning and being on the good side and doing something that is good for society, is good for consumers, is ultimately the best protection that you can have. But then beyond that I would add, just listening very carefully and being willing to double click, triple click, quadruple click, every time somebody tells you that you can not do something. And then ask sort of a why, why, why five times, until you get to the bottom. Because a lot of the times what we found is when a lot of those industry experts told us, you cannot do it, what lied beneath, was ultimately a lot of fear. It was fear of going against these big banks, these big dinosaurs. But nobody had ever attempted to do it. Nobody knew that you could do it. What we did was just go deep and really find opportunities to actually do what conventional wisdom thought it was impossible.

Being able to ask five, six times why, is important. Being honest and open, I think around the regulators helped a lot and developed good relationships. I think that's the right strategy, if you're playing the long game, where are you going to be with these regulators for 10, 20, 30 years. Sometimes you have to be patient. As you say, it is what it is. That's life. Some of these regulations have been there for decades. You're not necessarily going to be able to challenge them or change them. But there is a lot of opportunity to innovate within the existing regulatory framework. So that's what we did. We want to be compliant, but given this guard rails, there is a lot of opportunity to do things differently. A lot of our products, like our savings accounts, for example, we were able to create a fully new savings account within the existing regulatory framework and that was a very noted product.

Nubank's Unit Economics
Patrick: [00:31:11] Can you talk through how the actual business works itself? Because I have to imagine that I don't know what the number is globally, but there's lots of places still, where tons of people are unbanked, were going straight digital makes a ton of sense for some new company being built. Something that might look like Nubank, say for an Asia or wherever it is. Talk us through like the actual business. How does Nubank make money from its customers? How does that most differ from how a traditional bank monetizes the same, just better? Just walk us through the kind of business itself.

David: [00:31:42] One of the advantages of being in banking, is that banking per se, is one of the oldest industries in humanity. I think banking has something like 5,000 years. We're not Uber, doing a fully in your business model. We're taking a bunch of different risks. We're not taking business model risks. People understand how to make money in banking, especially in a market like Latin America, where you have some of the largest margins in banks. The question for us was a bit of a different bet. The bet was, can you make it free? First product, which was a credit card, credit cards in Brazil, banks charge a ton of different fees for a credit card. The bet that we had was, what happened traditionally is that, a consumer might have pay $100 dollars a year for a credit card so the bank gets $100 in revenue and they use that money to do customer acquisition, to acquire a customer. The flows go $100 get out of the customer's pocket and goes into Google or Facebook or the TV channel. Goes directly to customer acquisition.

Some of the bets that we had an initially was, let's charge nothing to the consumer. Hopefully, that translates into no customer acquisition cost. Google, Facebook, they lose. That money stays in the customer's pocket. That bet worked. We charge no fees, but our customer acquisition cost is effectively zero even today. So that was the first bet. But then there was a number of our revenues, we don't have fee revenue, but we have interchange revenue. We make money out of every transaction that a customer makes with a credit card. We also make money when the customer decides to use the credit card to finance themselves. And that's with a credit card. Then we make all our money in other types of financial services products. When we sell an insurance product, we charge a fee, a broker's fee. When you invest your money in an investment product, we charge a fee for AUM. We don't charge you the money for peer to peer transfers or any type of transfers. It's no fee. We charge no type of fees there. We charge a recurring fee, when do you want to have access to our rewards program and get points for every spend that you have? We think about similar revenues as the traditional banks have. We don't have any fee revenue. Then we have a huge advantage on the cost side, because as I mentioned, we don't have to pay 5,000, 6,000 branches or 100,000 employees. Itaú, the biggest bank in Brazil, has 50 million customers and they have 120,000 employees.

Patrick: [00:34:17] Wow.

David: [00:34:18] The advantage in terms of cost is 50X. That allows us to also charge less from customers and ultimately deliver financial products that are better for customers, easier experience, less friction, less fees, and also cheaper. So ultimately, it's a value proposition that is unbeatable.

Patrick: [00:34:39] I'm really interested by rewards programs. You mentioned briefly there, Nubank's rewards. Tell us everything you've learned here. What is the value of rewards programs? How do they work? Why do consumers like them so much? What does this experience tell you?

David: [00:34:52] One of the things that we also saw initially, as we understood this market was, customers were paying some of these high fees for credit card and they were getting associated rewards program. And the marketing of banks in a way taught them that rewards was a basis of differentiation. That they should differentiate credit cards based on who gave you the best rewards. In reality, when you analyze a lot of these rewards, the provisions were so complex, so hard for consumers to understand, that a lot of the times, these customers were making irrational decisions. They were paying very high fees to get a rewards program that supposedly was good. But if you had kept those fees money in your pocket, that was worth more than the rewards program itself. One of our bets that we did initially with our first product is, no fee, no rewards. That when completed as a conventional wisdom, that you needed a good rewards program to get a card. Lots of consumer loved it, and we grew extremely fast. A lot of customers didn't like it. They wanted their rewards. They were the true real rewards consumers, and they were willing to actually pay for it. So then we added a voluntary rewards program on top of it, where you actually pay a monthly fee. We created a program that is extremely simple for consumers, where it's effectively cash back for a number of different categories, where points never expire. You get the points instantly. You don't have to wait until the end of the month to get your points. You get them instantly and you can use them instantly, if you need them.

That has worked well. It has been a program. We have over a million customers in that program. But one of the opportunities that we still see there, and we still haven't necessarily been able to crack it, is that a huge transparency with customers, which we think we have to give it because it's a value of us, sometimes it's a bit of a shot in the foot. Because customers compare us apples to apples with other programs. They think other banks have better programs, because they give them better points. But then there's a lot of complexity and footnotes that they don't end up seeing. Customers end up preferring something else that is much more complex, but it's worked for them. That's a challenge that we, I guess, an opportunity that we're pressing. How do we continue evolving this program, maintaining the value of transparency, because we're not going to move away from that, giving more value to the consumer, but forcing the consumer to also ask hard questions from the banks' programs to force them to be as respondents as we are.

Patrick: [00:37:26] On of the things that I'm totally fascinated by, is the line of questioning of investors into companies like yours. I love that you've had experience as an investor. Then also you mentioned at the beginning, that Buffett and Berkshire were just asking great questions about your business. What were those best questions? If I was trying to understand Nubank today from an investors point of view, maybe just using Berkshire as the example, what were the best questions that they asked you as a part of that process, getting to know you?

David: [00:37:54] I would say it's first around really understanding the market opportunity and really understanding the peculiarities or the specificities of a market like Brazil. Some of the biggest opportunities you were mentioning Loft, and Loft not having MLS in Brazil. I give you the case here of not having FICA score. Some of the biggest opportunities I think exist today, globally, are in these market dislocations, are in these markets that have a significant failure and where technology adoption suddenly creates an opportunity to beat the incumbents. This could be in real estate or in financial services or in the number of different industries. A lot of investors, especially now emerging market investors, or US investors are getting to emerging markets, go very deep and are able to understand with a lot of clarity, why these market dislocations, this market failure, and then understand how the company is able to find that unique angle into filling that market dislocation.

US and Europe are very efficient markets. When you look at economics 101, your market textbook, generally is very efficient. When you have any financial services in the US, the margins of US banks are small. They're very small margins. That's ultimately because in the US, you have 4,000 banks. Everywhere you look, it's fine to have an angle. It's hard to find differentiation. Even capital, traditionally, capital was a constraint in an environment like ours. It's not a constraint anymore. In US, Europe, it's really hard to find that edge. Some of the best investor we've had today, are investors that have been able to understand why do we have an edge? They are going into emerging markets, not deterred by the volatility or the imperfections that these markets provide, but actually attracted by them. They're able to be contrarian in a way. I remember talking to a Series C, when Founders Fund let us talk to Peter Thiel, we were closing in November, 2015. Brazil was going into the worst economic recession in 100 years. Everybody we talked to, run through the hills. They didn't want to talk to us. They had no interest. When talking to Peter at Founders Fund, about Brazil matters. He said, "I couldn't care less." This is when the headlines in the newspapers were horrible about Brazil. Middle of corruption investigation. We could not get worse. That's because he was able to go very deep and understand these angles and these dislocations and why these create an opportunity. I would say that macro view is one big bucket of great questions.

The second is, a lot of focus on the team. How is this team really able to execute on that vision? Because ultimately, I would bet on the team more than necessarily the market. The team can really change and pivot and move as needed, since a lot of these opportunities tend to be very dynamic, you need a very dynamic team. The third one is more of a understood kind of unit economics, horizontal economics type of view of the business. I see these still in a lot of Brazilian or Latin American investors, where they hear we charge no fees and we don't do the same. When they hear that a startup has financial losses, that means the business model is broken. Obviously Silicon Valley and US, they're already much more sophisticated to understand that startups operate differently. It's about what are they underlying economics of a customer and how do the underlying economics of this customer evolve over time, to provide massive profitability down the road. A lot of the most sophisticated investors get to these unit economics or horizontal economics very quickly and ask the right questions to understand the potential for value generator, down the road. I think this is already very much common in US and Europe. I would say in Latin America, still the more traditional investors are very stuck in a P&L that generates losses.

Patrick: [00:42:02] What is the layer two of the unit economics for you guys? I certainly understand trying to figure out, "How much revenue might I generate from a new customer over time?" You've already talked about your cost of acquisition is basically zero, so that's pretty good level one unit economics. What's beneath that. The best investors dig in on unit economics for Nubank, where do they go beyond that layer one?

David: [00:42:26] We don't pay much money in marketing, cost of acquisition, but we do have a setup cost, which is data cost, underwriting a customer, sending the customer, creating a physical card, sending the card to a customer's house. We do have some set up costs. The first question is like, is what the payback of that initial cost is? One of the things that is hard to say the early stages, let's say series A, B and C, when you already have some data, but you don't have a lot of data is, understanding how that payback time might evolve over time and where there might be economies of scale. I remember when I was at Sequoia, at times in a certain business model, there was a lot of skepticism on whenever an entrepreneur would pitch the economies of scale or improvements in those unit economics over time.

There are some areas that I would be rightly skeptic. Let's say customer acquisition cost, for example. You can build arguments on both sides of the table that, as the company grows, the customer acquisition cost will come down or that customer acquisition costs could go up. It could go both ways. It depends a lot on the market, it depends a lot on the competition, it depends a lot of differentiation on the product. Scalability of CAC is hard to make a case here. But when you look at the cost structure of the business, obviously, my ability to negotiate a better contract with data providers, with logistics companies, with MasterCard, with any other type of provider, today, when I have 40 million customers is way, way, way, way better than what I had 10,000 customers. That's not debatable. So if you're stuck as an investor, only giving credit to that entrepreneur for the cost structure that they have, when they have 10,000 customers, you're being too skeptic. You got to understand how that cost structure is going to evolve over time, you get full credit of that evolving cost structure.

The other hard part in our business is we're giving credit. This is something that makes or not as much harder, because a lot of the time when you see very fast-growing businesses with credit, the cohorts might look fine until the next crisis comes. Then all bets are off, your delinquency spikes. This is what happened actually a lot to the financial services business that have balance sheets in the US through the crisis. A lot of financial services business is growing very, very fast in the good times. Then financial crisis came, and delinquencies spikes and those unit economics went really badly, very quickly. In our case has been different, because the only thing our credit models know, is Brazilian recession. We launched in 2014 and the past eight years for us, has been Brazilian recession. In our early recession, has been the worst recession in our century. Our models have been stress tested as much as you can possibly get. Now, we had a pandemic, an entire pandemic to test those credit models. A lot of these investors have been sophisticated enough in understanding, asking our questions and looking at our long data and getting a view of cohorts of credit and getting comfort in the underlying credit risk that we might take, or we might not be taking. That nuance around payback curves and how they evolve over time, depending on the stage of the company, depending on the scale of the company, it's a nuance that not all investors really look through.

Latin America, Lessons Learned, and Thoughts on the Future
Patrick: [00:45:49] If we were to zoom out a little bit and just think about Latin American technology opportunity and companies more generally, how far into this story do you think we are? I always fall in the trap of like, "Well, it was a good idea to invest in these things seven years ago, but now some of the major categories, banking, housing, et cetera, have been sort of tackled." Where do you think we are in this story? Is it early? Is it in the middle? I'm sure it's not towards the end. Just give us a sense of the Latin American technology ecosystem.

David: [00:46:18] It's extremely early. And there are a couple of data points there. We still have 250 million people out of 750 million people in Latin America, completely unbanked. They're literally grabbing cash and putting them under their mattress. This is even now. This is financial services, one of the biggest industries, but then when you look at all our verticals, insurance, you talked about Loft and real estate. When you see transportation, when you see healthcare, when you see education, it's all effectively, still offline. Most of education in Latin America is offline. People go offline. Most health care still happens in hospitals. There is no real yet, telemedicine at scale. When you compare some of these ratios with let's say China, another emerging market, or South East Asia, it's not even comparable yet to the level of the utilization that you've seen in countries like China or Southeast Asia. It's extremely early still for Latin America, I for the technology story.

Patrick: [00:47:24] You mentioned earlier, a lot of the things that have driven your success, thinking about this as a technology company, all the things that have led Nubank to be successful so far. What are some of the worst decisions that you've made? What did you learn from them? Just think about it viscerally, what was the big error in building the company that stands out in hindsight?

David: [00:47:44] Oh man. So many. I have to remember it all. I'll tell you a couple of ones very quickly. One specific one that I remember, very early days, I think it's indicative to a lot of decision is, I wanted the first two or three months at Nubank, I expected everybody to be in the office Monday 8:00 AM. If they were not Mondays at 8:00 AM in the office, I would start mistrusting the people in the team. Where did I get this from? It was sort of my natural environment coming from Sequoia, from General Atlantic, from Morgan Stanley. That's what you expect. People there in the office at 8:00 AM and being there. Even questioning somebody's competence or commitment, if they're not there. I just started stressing the team and getting very mad at people that wouldn't there until I had to be slapped in the face a little bit by my co-founder say, "What are you doing? This is the tech company. Engineers stay here until 11:00 PM. Do you want to give them the autonomy? You cannot be spending so much time trying to burden these people, and then mistrusting them the first couple of weeks."

So that already in the first few weeks of Nubank, was something that I had to start programming my brain, versus some of the experiences, the managing experience that I had to before. In trying to create an environment of trust, in trying to create an environment of autonomy, that ultimately are some of the key values we have as a company. Then some of the biggest mistakes have been around talent. I would say hiring the wrong people. It's a very hard decision because I think just entire recruiting process, regardless of how good you are and how sophisticated you can become at that recruiting process, you can start using a lot of data. You can use a lot of data around the questions that you ask and tracking those questions down the road, in terms of performance. It's still a very imperfect process. You're going to be making a lot of mistakes, a lot of the time. I would say there've been big decisions around people. Sometimes when I was too impressed by background or by the CV or by the logos, not necessarily focus enough on the character or the engagement or the attitude of the person. Some of the big talent decisions that I made, was because of that. Then the follow up mistake is, being too slow at letting that person go. One of the things, it's funny, I did business school and I remember people saying in business school, "When you start asking yourself, if you should let somebody go, it's already too late." I remember reading that I was like, "Yeah, that makes sense. You got to let go fast." In reality, it's much harder to actually do that than the traditional business school would say. Because you have the relationship with the person, because it's a nice culture.

But sometimes when I over thought that decision and it took three, four months more than it should have to make that decision, we just lose time. By the moment you make the call, generally 95% of the time, the person is thankful, the person is happy because they already knew that it was not working out. They leave in good standing and even something better than you ever expected, because then you open up the space for somebody else that want to come do the job, and you see a completely different trajectory in terms of a team that can be executing way better. It has always been easier and better than what I expected. Therefore, I should have made that decision faster.

Patrick: [00:51:28] What has you most excited about the future, just generally speaking? It can be Nubank related or not. Just giving you a unique perch and perspective on things and experience, what are you most excited about in the future?

David: [00:51:43] Being in the countries that we are, Brazil, Colombia, Peru, Mexico, we see a number of really bad news every single day. The pandemic has been an incredibly tough year for so many millions of people in our countries, because we lock the healthcare systems, we're being way behind on vaccinations. People didn't have the right knowledge, lot of fake news around, a lot of miscommunication. I think when it comes to something interesting I think the world for the pandemic, is how unprepared emerging markets are to deal with a crisis like this one. And has shown just really horrible stories around poverty and lack of vocation. Then even corruption. It's heartbreaking to see in a lot of these countries, politicians engaging in corruption with a pandemic. The literally number of cases of politicians that use healthcare contracts to get rich. Completely ignoring the level of pain that hundreds of millions of people have been having over the last year and a half or two years. The overall environment in Latin America today, is really bad. The political environment, the level of leadership of the public sector, poverty increased some of the good stories around the middle class growing. We've gone back to 10, 20 years. It's a very dire, very sad picture overall.

What gets me excited, is figuring out how Nubank and companies like Nubank, can have a shot at improving, even if it's a little bit, that entire scenario. And where we see that we just offer for example, as we have saved over $3 billion in fees to our customers, that if we weren't around today would be in the pockets of five big institutions. Now those billions are allowing to people buy medicines or allowing people to send their kids to school. That makes me very helpful.

When I see this happening in our industries, more competition, forcing lower prices, forcing more adoption, forcing better quality of life, that gets me very, very excited. I think ultimately, what gets me most excited is the opportunity of companies like Nubank, to contribute to economic growth and ultimately create the conditions for hundreds of millions of people to just be able to live a better life.

Patrick: [00:54:19] David, I ask the same closing question of everybody. It's been so much fun learning about what you built and just an incredible area of the world that has so much opportunity. A lot to be fixed as you just laid out. But it's been a pleasure learning from you today. The same question I ask everybody is, what is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

David: [00:54:35] I had a WhatsApp conversation with my mother yesterday. She found a letter that I had written 15 years ago, thanking her. It was the first time that I'd written paper, thanking her for all of the sacrifices she had to do for me and for my sister when we were growing up. We grew up in Colombia, in the '80s, in the middle of a pretty... effectively a civil war. We had to leave. My parents had to leave and we went to Costa Rica to try to find a more peaceful place. They had to leave their family behind, had leave all the friends behind. And that was a huge sacrifice I think, my parents did. When I read that WhatsApp yesterday and read that letter, I think that's the kindest thing ever. Reminded me that the type of sacrifice that my parents did and my mon did, with all of us was incredible. They effectively sacrificed their lives, their dreams, leaving a country behind, to try to create the best conditions they could possibly have for me. And my sisters. That was just amazing. I think that's it.

Patrick: [00:55:37] What an incredible story and place to close. Thank you so much for your time today. It's been a blast.

David: [00:55:42] Thank you, Patrick. Was an honor and a pleasure. Thank you very much.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
