
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released June 2nd, 2021
Founder's Field Guide
Assaf Wand - Innovation in Static Industries
Assaf Wand is the CEO and co-founder of Hippo, a homeowner insurance startup founded in 2015. We cover how Hippo approached innovation in the highly regulated insurance industry, unique strategies for building brand trust, and how direct relationships with homeowners have opened up Hippo's business model to a wide range of opportunities.

00:00:00
00:57:45
Introduction
Patrick: [00:02:07] My guest today is Assaf Wand, CEO and co-founder of Hippo, a homeowner insurance startup founded in 2015. In March 2021, Hippo announced a SPAC merger valuing the business at over $5 billion. In our discussion, we cover how Hippo approached innovation in the highly regulated insurance industry, unique strategies for building brand and trust, and how direct relationships with homeowners have opened up Hippo's business model to a wide range of opportunities. I was excited to speak to Assaf given his experience as a serial entrepreneur, and he did not disappoint. Please enjoy this great conversation with Assaf Wand.

Assaf's Business Philosophy
So maybe we can begin with what I'll call your philosophy of business. I know you love building things. You built a lot of things. Just talk us through your high-level view on entrepreneurship and business.

Assaf: [00:02:52] Wow, that's heavy stuff. Not that I haven't had my philosophy for business, but I'll give you what I usually tell entrepreneurs and excuse my French, I might curse a bit in this discussion.

Patrick: [00:03:03] Go nuts.

Assaf: [00:03:04] I think that entrepreneurship is hard. It's shit. It's crap. It's trench warfare. But the good thing about entrepreneurship is basically three things. You choose what you're going to work on, so it's your choice. You didn't join someone else to do whatever they wanted. You can wake up every morning and choose what you're working on. You can choose who you work with because you have a choice. If you're hiring a person, if you're not hiring a person, it's up to you. Not that you always have all of the options, but it's up to you. And you can build the culture that you want. It's like the epic thing of independence to carve something for what you want to do. You'll pursue what you want with the people that you want, and then build the culture that you want. That's the biggest benefit of entrepreneurship, in my mind, because you need to find a good reason why you wake up in the morning every day. As I told you, it's trench warfare. I always tell the team this week is going to be a week that we're just going to put the helmet and put the vest on, and we're going to start being bombarded.

Patrick: [00:04:04] What was your first taste of entrepreneurship? And how did that contrast with what you had done up until that point in your life?

Assaf: [00:04:11] I was born to be an entrepreneur. And the reason I was born to be an entrepreneur, is because I'm the worst employee you can find. I'm the worst in the politics of an organization. I don't understand them. I would always break a rule if something doesn't make sense. I believe in meritocracy. Put me in kindergarten, and someone says something that doesn't make any sense, I'm going to fight it. It's an embedded thing. I cannot accept that someone above me doesn't do a good enough job, but because he's senior or she`s senior, that doesn't make any sense. I'm not set up for it, which the weirdest thing is because I'm Israeli, I was also in the military. So you can say fine, okay, fine you didn't like this company, and you shift to another company. You didn't like this fine, but you're in the military. It's a hierarchical organization. So you can't really go to the general. So that's the dumbest thing. It just doesn't work like that. But the good thing is that the Israeli military is a lot less hierarchical than a lot of other places, that's one. And even within that rigid organization, there are specific units that are a lot more meritocratic, hence why it's actually enforcing for entrepreneurship.

Risk-taking and Entrepreneurship
Patrick: [00:05:21] Can you say what you think about the mindset of lawyers versus entrepreneurs as a contrast?

Assaf: [00:05:27] Yeah. Well, over the span of your life, you find there is a certain linear line of different kinds of mindsets. I'm going to give you another remark afterward about another mindset that I found very interesting. I think entrepreneurship is about optimism. You wake up every morning, and you are building something that you think is going to have an impact and change the world and going to be the force of positiveness, or it can be even economic, whatever you want.

I think entrepreneurship is about optimism. You wake up every morning, and you are building something that you think is going to have an impact and change the world and going to be the force of positiveness, or it can be even economic, whatever you want.

And then you have, on the other side, lawyers. And lawyers, their mindset is about only bringing up all of the negative in the world. I get the optimism of the contract of course, but what if and out comes a list of 600 different things that they need to defend. Now as a ground rule, I always try to stick away from talking to lawyers, which is very interesting because they only bring you to the negative mindset. And then constantly as an entrepreneur be positive. So I'm trying to avoid that. We're in the process of going public, which-

Patrick: [00:06:23] Requires lots of lawyers.

Assaf: [00:06:25] Oh God, It does a hostile takeover over your life. All you talk about is accountants and lawyers and that kind of stuff. So I think it's very, very different. In the last two, three years, I found another really, really interesting mindset that was very different to me. So I work in insurance because Hippo is an insurance company. And in insurance, there is a specific kind of personnel, which is actuaries. So entrepreneurial is the risk-taker by structure and the most risk-averse individual on the face of the planet, who can tell you that once in 150 years, there is a scenario for that is an actuary. So I ask in the company, people that are actuaries, which is the most foreign mindset I've ever met in my life. I'm like we can't do it because once every 17 years I'm like, what are you talking about? And the discussion is like, how many companies even last 17 years that you'll even bring in this topic and it's such an interesting mindset.

Patrick: [00:07:21] What was the most interesting experience of risk-taking in the entrepreneurial sense? Sabi and Forest Telecom were two companies that you started prior to Hippo. Talk us through the major lessons that you learned at those two companies that you brought forward with you or left behind when starting Hippo.

Assaf: [00:07:38] Sabi was a company that was started with the premise of the world is maturing and aging and people over the age of 50 have 91% of the net worth and 67% of the consumption, 63% of the net income. Usually, your parents are more wealthy than you. And even if they're not making more salary, they finished paying for their home, so they have more net worth in their stuff. So the thought was that people that are old have more worth. The world is maturing at a faster pace than the regular goals. So what I mean is there was a certain point of time because of baby boomers, which you can think about it as a python await a pig, and the pig keeps on going through the belly of the python. And now they're all 55 and above, but it used to be 20 and 30 and 40.

So now they're just maturing this massive population that basically created almost all of the worth in the world. And these are the people that actually capture that side of the world, but only 5% of the marketing budget is catering to them. So you have populations that have 91% of the net worth, but only 5% of the marketing budget is actually catering to them. Even in that 5%, I don't know. My guess is north of 80% is always negative. Who advertise to people that are above 50, a pharmaceutical company. You don't have any friends. You're impotent. You... Whatever. It's like it's always negative or the other side of it, it's like, have you saved enough money for your retirement? Do you have enough? It's always on the negative side. And I thought that's ridiculous because people live their life very differently. My parents are 66, 67 years old. Super healthy, active, traveling, and stuff like that.

And they shouldn't be catered like that. It should be a lot more positive. So I thought there is a place for a brand that celebrates that and basically caters to them and not cater to the caregiver or just the issues and the challenges. And that's why we started Sabi, which is a Japanese word, which is part of this Sabi Wabi... Wabi-Sabi kind of thing. So Sabi, it's a Japanese concept about beauty in aging. That the patina and the passing of time over an object, over the hardwood floors, that's what brings it character. We basically started a company that the idea is let's create products that are more geared toward these individuals. So it can be anti-slippery surfaces in the house and grab bars and things of that sort. Every once in a while you go to the hotel, and you get the handicapped home, and it feels bad, and it feels bad because it was utilitarian, which is horrible because nobody thought on the end customer, and how do they feel. They just tick mark that this is something regulatory that they need to do.

And then you start to do some research, and you see that we work with some of the best designers in the world. Redesigning and focusing on products that are a lot smarter and create new grab bars, new anti-slippery surface, new canes, peel boxes, which are so shameful. Can they be slightly more whimsical, stuff like that? So that's what we did with that. I'll come back to the point that you asked before, what did I learn? That maniacal customer focus and actually thinking of what the customer wants is at the center of everything as opposed to "let's start with what they need and stuff..." No. Let's talk and talk and talk to customers and put in physical goods as much as I hate it. And I would never do physical goods ever in my life, but there is so much joy in seeing someone actually using a product, and you can actually follow up, follow a person on his day-to-day routine and see hundreds of different touchpoints that you never thought are important, that you can incorporate into the product to make a product smarter, better. Something that brings you joy as opposed to shame.

Speed In Business
Patrick: [00:11:14] You mentioned that you'll never do hardware again or anything physical again. Talk about speed in business. The importance of speed, what you've learned about it, and how you deploy it.

Assaf: [00:11:23] So hardware has limitations on speed because if we want to come up with a cool product that we want to launch tomorrow. Patrick and friends are like, tomorrow we are launching this product. So we need to design. Maybe that can be fast. We need to basically engineer it. Okay, not so fast. And then comes the process, which is the most magical thing in hardware called tooling. So you need to basically find a block of metal that a laser goes and scan it. It takes six to eight weeks in order to plug this block into a machine to basically manufacturer on a scale. So no matter what, you're in the middle of this process, it's going to take you two to three months, and you need to do integrations on that. And then what about shipping? You're not going to isolate everything because you're going to kill all of your margins.

So now we need to ship. Shipping from China, now we're in a world where we can't even find containers. Let's say you find a container. That's going to take six to eight weeks and custom and shipping. And so, even if you turn it on tomorrow morning, it's going to take forever and the cycle. So hardware, it takes a long time. The interesting thing is that FinTech and InsurTech specifically also take a long time. There is no MVP. There is no I'm going to start selling insurance to Patrick. You need a department, you need to file the rates, and you need to approve it with the department of insurance. And the department insurance takes time. And by the way, there are 50 departments of insurance in the U.S. So the fact that I'm live in California doesn't mean I can be live in Oregon and Arizona, which are around the same vicinity.

Even that takes a while. And if I offer you the first product, if I offer you insurance, I need to have a call center because maybe you have a question, and I need to offer you a claim because maybe you bought your home insurance and the following day, you're going to have a claim. So I need to take care of you. So there is no MVP, which changes how investors should look at anything, specifically InsurTech and FinTech as well. Depends if it's loans and payments and stuff like that. It just takes a while. And you're managing in FinTech, it's people's money. It's not whimsical. It's a TikTok, it works. It doesn't work. It's live. It's not live. I'm not saying... It has its own merit and its own place.

But if God forbid, TikTok is not working tomorrow, or they meet a problem. Fine, there's going to be people that are going to lose money because their livelihood is on that. But it's not going to actively hurt a lot of people. But if I overcharge you, and it's your money, and you're going... Something's going to happen. God forbid you have a total loss fire in your home, and you weren't insured properly. So now I can't really make you hold for that. That's a way more important problem. So you can't mess it up. You need to make sure that it's all working, hence why it's not fast on the product side. What's fast is the iterations afterward on how you bring the product to the market, how you focus on the customer, how you iterate, how you do AB testing. I believe that sense of urgency is one of the core strengths of a startup.

I have an ongoing fight to maintain it. It's a lot easier when you have 30 people. Now that we have 500 people, it's a struggle and a fight. We used to jump on every grenade that was thrown and fix whatever there is. Now, all of a sudden there's a process and there's this, and we should really, really make sure that it's allocated as we have on the prioritization. This is part of the fight for growth. CEO wants to push the company and maintain what I believe, differentiated the company, to the fact that we have hundreds of thousands of customers, and we need to maintain a system, and we need to add processes and some standardization. So there's this ongoing fight that's going on. I believe the time to market, speed, iteration, and things of that sort. What would negate us from being an incumbent, and you are bringing more people that are more seasoned and pushing to the other side, and that's the inherent fight that I have right now in the company.

Patrick: [00:15:02] How do you personally act to increase, maintain, inject urgency into the business, even at this stage? What are you as the leader doing actively to try to keep that up?

Assaf: [00:15:12] You lead by example. How you do things is how everybody's going to do things or as close to that. When I got married, a friend of mine came and said, "Listen, I'm going to give you two tips for the wedding. Tip number one is you're not the host, so don't worry. You paid a lot of people to be the host, so you don't need to make sure that Patrick is eating and the stuff is fine. Chill on that." But the second thing and this is the point that I wanted to make on that one is, "Wherever you are going to be that's where the guests are going to be. So if you want everybody to dance, so you need to be on the dance floor. You want everybody to eat, just go and eat. You want everybody to mingle and be in the bar, be in the bar. You can't expect everybody to be in a certain place if you're not going to do it. You're the focal point. You're the weight and you are basically the force of gravity." So if I am as a CEO, want to have a sense of urgency on sales now, I need to focus on sales and the gravity is going to lean towards that side. And I think my job is to constantly see where there is stuff that is needed and to change the gravitational pull and be in that area. And that's what's basically going to push the focus on that side. And I need to constantly think of where is the problem right now, move the gravity, and unlock all kinds of hurdles.

Patrick: [00:16:23] Do you have a favorite example within Hippo's history of you doing this, where you recognize something that needed movement or momentum, and you led the charge as the first person in?

Assaf: [00:16:35] It's almost a daily thing. We're in a world of insurance, which basically means that our view is that our reason for being as a company is to take care of you when shit happens. I don't know how to better explain it. And every once in a while, shit happen. There were catastrophic losses in Texas, where there was a massive freeze recently. So I need to work 24/7 and take care of our customers and our employees and all of that. Our claim and call center is in Austin where that's the mothership-

Patrick: [00:17:05] Epicenter. Yeah.

Assaf: [00:17:06] Yeah. So I had to take care of 32 people to find them homes, my employees first, because we have people with kids, with a two-year-old that didn't have heat. So I was on the phone with temporary housing, talking to a friend who has a hotel, if he minds putting the hotel online and bring it in so I can put my employees after that let's start taking care of our customers. I ordered what was it, like a thousand lasagnas but it was my credit card because there was an issue at the beginning, to basically go and hand over to customers that didn't have heat. And this is just one example. It happens on an ongoing basis. We have a problem with service levels deteriorating all of a sudden. Why? We had a shift of leadership. We have a new CRM system until they learn until they're not. And this is unacceptable to me. Like we were supposed to be the best in treating our customers, period. And if something doesn't happen, let's acknowledge it.

That's one, instead of giving excuses and stuff like that, let's acknowledge it. Let's do something which is even brute force. Let's take a third party. Let's put all of our people over time and just take care of it. And in the back, make sure that all of the systems are going live. So every week there's a new thing that happens. Every insurance treaty requires my time. Now it's about going public. So I'm somewhat of the face of the company. So I need to be shown more with specific investors, it's always like that. I used to tell my chief product officer who was one of the first employees, if not the first employee that I worked with, in the company, there was a point where he took me to a discussion and said, "Listen, I don't get the love anymore because we used to talk all the time. And all of a sudden, I hardly see you." And I told him, "That's the best thing that can happen to you. If you're going to talk to me too often, then it's probably something is wrong and it's not a good thing. So as long as you don't see me, it's a really, really good sign for you."

The Insurance Industry
Patrick: [00:19:00] I'd love to rewind the clock to 2015 and the founding moments or insights of the business. What did the insurance industry look like and feel like to you right at the start of Hippo? And then I want to use that ground setting as a great excuse to talk about how the business has evolved. What did it feel like at the start?

Assaf: [00:19:20] I'll tell you the magic of insurance. In 2015, it looked exactly like it looked to me in 2005 and probably exactly as it looked at 1995. That's the magic of insurance and that's why I think it's an amazing place to start a venture. So a lot of the seeding of the idea was when I was working with McKinsey in New York, in the financial institution group and amongst the customers that you serve are insurance companies and you serve them and you realize that they can hardly implement anything. There's politics. There's regulation. There is a lack of systems. There's just a lot of issues, there's a lack of speed. We talked before about speed. This is probably the stalest kind of industry I've ever seen in my life. People are very content and happy to go with 4% a year and you can actually do it by increasing some of the premiums, which is fine because they're going up higher than inflation anyway. So everybody's content and happy.

So I looked at starting the business in 2005, and it was the same kind of business that I basically set up in 2015. The difference is actually not that the industry changed, is that the world changed around it a lot more. So in 2005, the reason I felt like it's not a good time to start the company was, well, three things. One is that you couldn't build a backend. So if we were talking about starting an insurance company, I would have done the research. And then I would have said, "Okay, fine. It's going to cost me three to $400 million." And it's going to take three to four years and I would need to bring a company like Duck Creek or Guidewire to build a backend, and these are services companies, not really technology companies, especially at that point in time. I would need to buy Oracle Database 9.

I would need to bring Xcential to build everything. They would ask me a question of how many customers do you think you're going to have at year seven and I'm going to say, "I think 250,000 customers." And they're going to say, "Fine. You're going to pay us per customer in year seven." And that's how it was wired. I'm like, "Okay, I guess that's not the number one venture to start as an entrepreneur." The second thing is there was a lack of data. So whenever you wanted to start something, you would have asked, "How can you compete with Allstate? They have 10 million households that they're insuring, they've been in business for 115 years. How can you compete with them?" And the answer would have been, "I probably can't." And then the third one was the world was in a different place of trust of a new brand. Insurance is a game of trust. At the end of the day, you want to know that if God forbid something happens to you, the counter side is going to be able to take care of you and pay you and all of that kind of stuff. That's basically insurance. You're buying a promise. There's no product, it's the weirdest product in the world. It's a product that you, as a customer don't want to use. And the people that sell you the product, don't want you to ever use. It's a very weird product. And what you're buying is the right to file a claim. If God forbid something happened and you weren't fraudulent, that's what you're buying, the right for a claim. And I thought people would not trust a new brand. Those were the three things. So lack of ability to build a backend, lack of data and I'm not sure people would trust a new brand.

Insurance is a game of trust. At the end of the day, you want to know that if God forbid something happens to you, the counter side is going to be able to take care of you and pay you and all of that kind of stuff. That's basically insurance. You're buying a promise. There's no product, it's the weirdest product in the world. It's a product that you, as a customer don't want to use. And the people that sell you the product, don't want you to ever use.

Fast forward to 2015. You realize that you can build everything on scale using AWS for that and Twilio for that and Stripe for that. And Intercom for the chat. There's so much stuff that you can actually build on scale, and you don't need to commit for how many customers because I don't know, as many customers as you are going to have, that's the customers that you're going to have, and you don't have all of the legacies because I don't need to commit upfront for something that's going to be legacy by the time it's actually going live and I can build a stack myself, and it's a lot more cost-effective. So, that hurdle dropped. The second thing is there is a point that you realize it's the complete opposite side of data, we're in a world with an abundance of data, you have unlimited data. So you're in a world where it's a benefit to be a newcomer because there's no legacy, you can build on scale and data is an advantage as opposed to a disadvantage.

And the third one, which was the brand and the trust and all of that. There was a point where I realized that stuff is doing everything online, I'm getting my student loans from SoFi. I'm managing my money with "Well Phone", I'm trading in whatever it was, E-trade now Robinhood, et cetera. Fine, insurance is just one more thing. So it came to that. And then on top of all of it, I'm going to add one more random thought that I realized, is that the world is moving to specialization as opposed to bucketing things together. Because I get this question quite a lot. How can you compete with Farmers and Travelers and all of that because they are having bundling? And what we realized is that two things, one, the world is moving to specialization and have specific products that are way better for what you want to do. So it's actually going in that direction and insurance it's still somewhat set up as a bundle, but it keeps on being dis-mitigated. And we have a saying in the company that "if you tie two rocks together, they don't float." By you buying crappy home insurance and crappy auto insurance and connect it doesn't make it a better product. It's still two crappy products connected together. So you should buy the right auto insurance and the right home insurance. And it's way better for you as a customer. And it's moving in that direction. So I'm just adding it to the three points that I said about insurance is that I also had this conviction, that being a mono-line company, there is merit in it.

How Hippo Built Trust
Patrick: [00:24:50] It's interesting how in the internet era, it does seem to be easier to build a brand quickly like bootstrap that trust if you're incredibly focused on one narrow thing because then people just assume all your effort is going into that thing. And they're used to using a lot of products. What were the most important things you did to bootstrap trust? It still is an insurance business. It's not a D2C brand or something where you can spin up a brand story. You still need people, even if they think your sole focus is home insurance and that's good, you're still brand new. So what worked when it came to bootstrapping trust quickly?

Assaf: [00:25:22] We were lending someone else's brand. That's the best example that I find. So there was a point where you realize the following thing, which is most people actually don't buy home insurance. What you buy is you buy a home. If you buy a home, you need a mortgage. And if you need a mortgage, you need proof of insurance. So you are a side product of home buying. And because of that, we realized that it started with distribution, but it actually has to do with the brand in order for that, I want to work with everybody that has to do with home purchasing. So we work with companies like Better Mortgage and Blend on the mortgage side, we work with Doma on the title side. We work with banks. We work with mortgage services, companies like HomePoint. We work with Compass and Realogy on the real estate side, with Lennar and Tobey on the home builders' side, we work with everybody that has to do with that. So it's really good for the distribution.

But to your point from before, how do you build trust? And what do you do with that? You're basically lending the brand of Chase. If you're getting a mortgage from Chase and Chase is saying, "Patrick, do you want to have insurance?" You're like, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah." You're just doing it. I'm basically riding Chase's brand because if Chase did it and they plugged me in, then I'm probably good enough. And I have the halo effect of the Chase brand. And that was part of this whole thought of how do we increase customer satisfaction until we're going to have scale enough and word of mouth and branding and marketing and enough people that have claims, which was a positive experience. And people saw our net promoter score, which is whatever, 75 and our claims one, these things take a while. So we were using other channels' brands to gain, call it, trust by proxy.

Patrick: [00:27:03] Obviously it begs the question. I think I've seen you talk elsewhere about one of your top strengths being distribution, and maybe even partnerships more specifically, how did you convince them? So same problem, one degree removed. So what was the key there?

Assaf: [00:27:16] Relentlessness. When I was a young business development person, my VP was talking to me about how you build business development. It's a bottom-up kind of thing, which is we're going to get threefold small customers. And once we're going to get threefold small customers, then we're going to try and get one medium one. And then it's going to take us two years and we're going to bring through two or three medium ones, and then you're going to try and hit your whale. It's like you grow into that. Hey, I'm not patient enough for that.

It never works well for me, I'm starting from the top. So we bought Comcast and we bought Lennar and the interesting thing is it's probably not a high ratio, but once you find that the CEO of Lennar gets what you're trying to do, the entire organization is basically on your line. And then all of a sudden, you actually start with the whale, in this case, a close partner of us and they're on our board, et cetera, and you get recognition and the other people in the industry are looking at you instead of like, it's a nice step. What do these guys got that they already were like... we have to do that as well. So you actually go top-down, which is a lot more effective, but it requires my job to be, I don't know, 50% of the time chasing these people. I think that you build a relationship by being very honest and very transparent and not overselling because it's never going to fly. And it starts with a partnership and it becomes a friendship or something. All of our partners are friends, in some ways, and there are many times where we need to make choices that are not for the benefits of Hippo but for the benefit of the partners because you're taking a very long-term view. Over a while, you build your reputation, that this is what you do, and you start winning. I think that you build a relationship by being very honest and very transparent and not overselling because it's never going to fly. And it starts with a partnership and it becomes a friendship or something.

I think that you build a relationship by being very honest and very transparent and not overselling because it's never going to fly. And it starts with a partnership and it becomes a friendship or something.

Patrick: [00:29:04] It begs yet another question in the chain, which is, you mentioned earlier, there's no MVP here. Like there's a lot you actually have to build and do, regulation, 50 states, all this stuff, I guess I'd be curious to hear more about what the original building blocks of a business like this were. But when you show up for these partnerships, what stage are you at? What have you already built? It seems like you always need to be a little bit ahead of where you actually are and time that right. Talk me through that. What had you built when you were talking to these people?

Assaf: [00:29:30] Always a lot less than what I thought I built and then they said, "No, no, you're crazy. We cannot do that." I'm like, "Well, you just told me it's okay." There's a significant lag in business development deals, I have failed to see a business development deal that is less than six months. It's like work speed. There needs to be an organization and things. They're going to say, "Listen, we can't put it in Q1. It needs to be in Q4." And it's never going to work in Q4 because they have another... The good thing is that you're actually buying time in business development. You're selling a façade while behind it, there's nothing in it. It's like a movie set. And you know that you also... Even if you're going live, it's not going to be unscathed. It's fine to have people moving the papers around in the back, and you're buying yourself more capabilities over time.

What you also realize in Silicon Valley is probably, don't catch me on the number, I would say 80% of business development deals don't work. But you raise money on business development. So you always come to the pitch with a VC and we just got... Verizon. And they have 50 million customers. And it's going to be just one out of... And everyone's like, "Oh, that's awesome." And it never works. Never works. But you raise money on that, which enables you to build some other stuff to scale into the next thing. It never works. Not because of strategy, because of implementation, because the person that you did the deal just move to another company, and nobody cares about you, and you become an orphan project... Or there's another priority, and this quarter wasn't doing well. So they're about increasing margins and not... There are always reasons. It's not bad or illegitimate reasons. It's just that business development usually doesn't work. So one of the things that we did is we doubled down on the business development. So the people that led our B round were Comcast. And the people that did our C round... Where are they now?

So they were on our board. They had a certain level of incentives with some warrants which were like only if they're doing hundreds of thousands of customers and stuff like that... Up to a point where it's like, I'm happy to give you... If Patrick gives me a million customers, I'll give you 5% of the company. Because when you're doing 10,000 customers, I'll happily give you that because the appreciation in the value of the company is a lot more than the 5% I'm going to give Patrick.

So you're doing all kinds of incentives. You're bringing them to the board. You investing in this relationship, which improved the chance of a business development team to work basically a hundred X or whatever it is. The tough stuff is that within Silicon Valley, and Silicon valley worship name brands VCs because that's what they built. This is the neighborhood... And people, they built the brand. So every time you announcing around, it was like, "Really? So you took Comcast? What the hell is that?" And then I need to start explaining, "I don't know if you know, but Comcast has 28 million households, that they're basically serving, and they want to move to Smart Home, and they want to do some stuff." So I can target 28 million customers, which is quite a lot for a company that had 100 customers... And have a deeper discussion. And then it makes sense, but it's not trivial. And you find yourself explaining why you did that instead of raising money from Sequoia and Excel and stuff like that. So we took a route of strategics, but only if they bring us distribution at any given point. And I think it's actually one of the things that were the most successful for the company.

Innovator's Dilemma in Insurance
Patrick: [00:32:59] Can you talk a bit about the lessons you've learned on innovator's dilemma by building in the insurance space? Because you've already mentioned how in most ways the product was the same in '95, in '05, and '15. That doesn't seem to be a lot of product innovation. What are your thoughts and innovator's dilemma, and how has that influenced what you've built?

Assaf: [00:33:18] I try to address it in several ways. One, nobody's disrupting insurance. It's not an internet product. It's a regulatory product per state. Everything needs to be approved and admitted itself. It's not something that these allow. So by structure, you have a lot less innovation. Now on the flip side, we think there's still a vast amount of innovation that can happen. It's just not disrupting. It's about evolution. And so usually what happened is when I'm sitting in a room with investors, then I'm asking them guys, "Okay, I'm going to ask you a question. Who are you guys insured with?" And it takes them a couple of minutes. And usually, I get an answer, like All Farm. Oh no, let me Allstate, no State Farm... Farmers. That's it, Farmers. So they know the name of the company, although not sure it's their company. And the second question is like, "Okay. And what's the difference between Allstate and Farmers and Travelers?" I don't know. I have no idea. And what we try to do because we're competing in a field that our competitors are spending north of a billion dollars a year on creating brand names. You know them because you're like you can't open a TV and not see-

Patrick: [00:34:25] Commercials. Yes. Yes.

Assaf: [00:34:26] Five seconds after you saw the commercial, I'm going to ask you, "What was the commercial for?" And you have no idea, but it was one of them Farmers list... It was one of them. And one of them has tinting cream, and the other one dumb, dumb, dumb. And these guys have quarterback one and quarterback two, and which one is which? You know the brand. You don't know what they are. And there's no differentiation on the brand. So in Hippo, we are differentiating on the product, and the main differentiation is to focus back on Patrick as a customer. Because this is an industry that the main point that you realize is that they forgot who`s the customer. The customer for this industry for 100 years was the agent.

The Future of Hippo and the Importance of Culture
Patrick: [00:35:00] So there has got to be just a million ways to create a business model around the home once you have a trusted relationship with the homeowner. So what is your vision for the firm? Are you an insurance company? Or are you something different? If we come back in five years and you've been successful in your vision, what does that mean?

Assaf: [00:35:06] I think you hit the nail on the head. The vision of the company is, we call it protecting the joy of ownership. It's about homeowners. It's about focusing on them. And what you see is that there is this massive gap between the romantic view of Patrick buying a home, and you're going with your partner. And you're like, "Oh, let's look at this home." And all you have are these googly eyes... Or "this is going to be magic. The kids are going to roam around the front yard and going to ride their bikes. And I'm going to water the plants in the back. And I'm going to drink coffee and read my New York Times over the weekend." You have this romantic view of what homeownership is. And then you move to the house. And three months later, you have a what-the-F kind of moment. It's like, "Oh, God. The plumbing doesn't work well. And we have a problem on that side. And I really need to fix this thing. The window is rickety. And the back door doesn't lock."

And you find yourself damn, I thought I have a full-time job. All of a sudden, I have another full-time job which is taking care of the home. And you know what? It's not fun. So we're trying to help people basically be the best homeowners they can and help them take care of everything. I view it as we're going to be the 1-800 number of every shit that happens in your home. And it can be very broad... It can be you're locked out of your home and you need a locksmith call us. Don't go to Yelp and find your random person that's going to come. Call us. We're going to send a locksmith. You want to install a shelf. We're going to help you with that. God forbid, there's a water leak. We're going to take care of that. Your fridge is going to be not working anymore. We can help with that. Maybe have a relationship with a sodding expert kind of thing that can give you the backyard grass. And whatever it is, I want to be the place that takes care of your home and focuses back on the customer.


 

Source: Company Presentation

We also have a belief that a better-maintained home going to have fewer losses. And fewer losses is going to be beneficial for me on the loss ratio, as well as happy customers going to recommend. It's differentiated as we talked about before. Because what's the difference between Farmers and Travelers? I don't know. But what's the difference in Hippo? Because they constantly help me take care of my home. I'm actually trying to have more touchpoints with my customers in an industry that`s trying to have the least touchpoints. I think you build a brand by adding value to the customer and focusing back on them.

Patrick: [00:37:28] I'm obsessed with this idea of static business models changing to what I call streaming business models. And this is a great example of that, where rather than just one and done... Policy, see you never. It's this ongoing relationship that you're able to build because of data, because of the orientation of the business model, et cetera. In every example that you've given us, that's kind of fun and interesting about what you're building, there's this commonality which is sort of like a first-principles approach. You're just looking at the situation and wondering, "All right, what's best for the customer?" Let's just do that rather than do things how it's been done in the past. So I'd love to do a sequential series of questions on different parts of company building and product building, and just hear your sort of unique first principles take on them. Maybe starting with culture. So you've built several businesses now. How do you think about culture? How important it is, how you can be intentional about building it, and the reason that it's worth investing effort into it?

Assaf: [00:38:11] I think it's key. I think it's super, super important. I'm going to add a couple of things. First, culture is about what you do, not what you say. The number one principle of the company is you say what you do, you do what you say. That component itself is where people hear all the time. If you told me you're doing something, do something. But I need to basically make sure that I'm doing it. You build culture by constantly delivering in what you said you're going to do. And the biggest enforcer of the culture is actually the DNA. It's about hiring people that have the same kind of level of culture talking about it all the time. And then they're going to be the ambassadors to keep on trickling down and feed it into the organization because there's a certain point where you can do it. And what, okay. You build culture by constantly delivering in what you said you're going to do. And the biggest enforcer of the culture is actually the DNA. It's about hiring people that have the same kind of level of culture talking about it all the time. And then they're going to be the ambassadors to keep on trickling down and feed it into the organization because there's a certain point where you can do it. And what, okay.

You build culture by constantly delivering in what you said you're going to do. And the biggest enforcer of the culture is actually the DNA. It's about hiring people that have the same kind of level of culture talking about it all the time. And then they're going to be the ambassadors to keep on trickling down and feed it into the organization because there's a certain point where you can do it. And what, okay.

I can go and talk once a week to all of the people. That's not what brings the customer. It's how you behave when something happens. These are the stories that basically trickle down. This is what people see. This is what people watch. And you need to be very consistent with that. I want to say one more thing is, so Hippo is the collection of all of my previous fuck-ups. I had several companies. I have different beliefs. I believed that you need to work harder than anybody else. You need to work 24/7, and how can you compete with the big guys? I'm going to compete because I'm going to actually work. And then you realize that you actually make mistakes, and it's not the right thing. And it's a marathon and not a sprint, and you're going to bring everybody down. And it's okay that I'm going to work in a certain way. I'm actually not expecting my people to work in a certain way.

Since that time, I also have two kids. And I think it's really important for me personally, to be a present dad and to try to have dinners with them, et cetera, I'm not talking COVID where the entire equilibrium changing the world, that all of a sudden my kids are sick of seeing me. I mean before that on a regular basis. But I want to have a company that people are happy to go to work... Work there nine to six or whatever they need to work. But it's also a mature organization. So what I mean is there's no face time. I don't want to see you. You have your job. So just do it. And if you need to go to a recital, please go to the recital of your kid. It's completely fine. But you manage your own time afterward to do the work. I don't care where you're at. I care that you're doing the job that you need to do. And you raise a flag if you don't do it. And the ability to constantly deliver on that and act in a certain way, that's what builds the culture.

It's becoming harder in COVID and when the company becomes big. One of the things I don't like about COVID is that it makes all of these things to be a lot. It makes people be more mercenaries than missionaries. You try to hire missionaries to the company. And to build missionaries kind of thing, you need to have ongoing touchpoints with people. And when half of the company... Usually, people said, "The company is growing like crazy." Half of the people are less than a year in the company. Now add to that they never stepped a day in the office, never saw another employee, never... It's a lot harder. And to instill culture into them when it's all remote is very, very difficult and something that I don't think anybody cracked until now. But it becomes a lot. One of the challenges of COVID, hence why you constantly need to deliver on what you're saying, and hopefully it will trickle into everybody.

Patrick: [00:41:29] What have you learned about the importance internally and externally of building stories and narratives?

Assaf: [00:41:34] Super important. Storytelling is how you basically communicate. You don't communicate with bullets and points and stuff like that. People remember a story. It's vivid when something happened. I think I'm okay that I'm not that good. If I'm telling a story, I need to deliver on it. I'm not telling a story because it's really, really nice. I'm telling a story that I mean it. You can test me on that. You can check me on that. And if we failed, please call me on that because otherwise, we can't improve.

Lessons and Reflections on Various Aspects of Business
Patrick: [00:42:02] What have you learned about managing a product roadmap? So a lot of the story of Hippo is that you're rebuilding what it means to be an insurance product. There's a lot of elements to that, that you've walked us through. Above all that is managing it. So what have you learned about that part of the business?

Assaf: [00:42:16] Probably one of my biggest growth areas. Now that the company is a lot more bigger and stable, there is a product roadmap. We have a monthly, we have a quarterly, we have yearly. We're trying not to change too much. We became realistic that we actually give 25% of the capacity for all of the craziness that we're going to change anyway. So the product 12 mark is only for 60, 75%. There's a certain point that you just acknowledge that we can't do 100 because we know that we're going to change it. So let's just acknowledge it and keep it 25% allocation. And the whole idea is that we're going to come up with is extra capacity. There's so much ... in the company. I'll give you an example. We'll usually run sprints in two weeks kind of increments. And we started adding one out of four sprints or stuff like that is a quality sprint.

We never had quality sprints. You were just sprinting. But then you're realizing that you're starting to carry bugs and all kinds of stuff like that. So you had to stop and say, "Guys, no, no, no. This sprint is a quality sprint." All we do is fix up all of the bugs because you start to realize that you have bugs that you knew about for the last three and a half years. And then it's like, why the hell haven't we fixed it? We haven't fixed it because it's not a top priority. And we kept on developing other stuff. And we're like, no, no. We need to bring it to the right kind of level. So we started embedding that into the process. Our product roadmap is somewhat more rigid. I think it's very rigid compared to my character. The team thinks it's not rigid enough, which is fine. It's a good balancing act.

Patrick: [00:43:39] When you think about the customer? We started with the lesson you learned from early on was disrespect the customer. What is it about the customer that you have to respect? Is it the better, cheaper, faster preference that they have? What does that mean to you to actually respect a customer?

Assaf: [00:43:53] The main point in insurance is that you pay fairly. And if you are honest and weren't fraudulent, I'm going to make you whole if God forbid something happened. And this is the promise, it's a very simple premise. You paid us for something. God forbid something happened. We're going to make sure that we take care of you. And that's the number one promise that we have with our customers. And that's what I'm constantly basically pounding at the team. That's what we need to do. However, this thing can tweak. I'll give you an example. If I'll pay everybody really, really fast for whatever they say, then all of a sudden they're going to be very, very happy. If you told me, "Listen, the damage is $5,000." I'm going to say, "Patrick, here's six." Of course, you're going to be happy. But I'm going to do a disservice to myself as an insurance company because I can never make money out of that.

So what we're basically saying is treat the customer like you want to be treated yourself. Be very honest with them. Don't tell them bullshit. Tell them exactly. This is what covered. Let me explain to you. Treat them as adults. Be very honest with them. Be yourself, but be attentive. And be empathetic because people, when they use the product, shit happened. You didn't buy a shirt. And it's like, "Oh, that's going to be nice to have." There is a total loss of fire, god forbid. You're not going to have a home for six months or whatever it is. This is not the time to have an adversarial kind of thing, which is by structure out, how this is set. Can you be empathetic, and explain, and take the time? Our call center is not measured on time on call with a customer. I always tell the people on the phone that if Patrick calls, and they're going to ask him, "Patrick, who are you insured with now?" And he's going to say, "Farmers." And they're going to ask you all of the questions or, "Do you want to walk me through your current policy? Let's review that."

treat the customer like you want to be treated yourself. Be very honest with them. Don't tell them bullshit. Tell them exactly. This is what covered. Let me explain to you. Treat them as adults. Be very honest with them. Be yourself, but be attentive. And be empathetic

I'm completely fine if they're going to say at the end of the day, "Patrick, I actually think that Farmers is covering you very well. I think it's completely fine." And I'm telling them, "Fine you in the long-term game, you're not in the short term. I don't care about your conversion. There's a good chance that Patrick is going to refer five of his friends because they were so honest, they checked it and they said, it's fine, and maybe in two years, farmers are going to miss something. There's a good chance that you're going to move to us. And you're building something over the long term, that's what it means for me to focus on the customer; do the right thing on the long-term, and not just short-term." And most customers appreciating that. Over time, if you were honest, if you were loyal, if you took care of them, if you treat them honestly, you can be pissed, you were expecting something, but at the end of the day, at the bottom of your heart, you do know that someone treated you fairly.

Patrick: [00:46:21] You went from very fast startup, attacking an industry which really hasn't changed much over a very long time, and you're going public, so hopefully soon you'll be the incumbent. How do you think about the defensibility of the business? So insurance has got this regulatory aspect, which we've talked about a little bit, it's got these huge brands that everyone can name, but couldn't really tell you what that means. These are things that take time and are hard to attack and protect those businesses. How do you think about protecting your business as it matures?

Assaf: [00:46:50] If we keep on focusing on the customers, and we're going to do well by them, we're going to take care of them, and we're going to hit on our vision, which is protecting the joy of ownership, I'm actually super relaxed. It's fine. So that's on the micro; we just need to keep on delivering on our promise to our customers. On the macro, it's really, really interesting. So home insurance, it's a $105 billion market in the US, in premiums. And it's actually going up it's five to $6 billion a year, and it's going to keep on going like that for a long time. Several reasons: one, there's going to be more homes in the US next year than this year. It just is. Two, labor and material have a tendency to always go up way faster than inflation. Just look at what happened with timber and stuff like that, and in the last year it popped by like 80%. So it has a tendency to go higher than inflation, which means that if you increased it by three to 4%, out of 105, but that's a $4 billion increase in the market.

And the last component is, our homes have a tendency to basically get more complicated and sophisticated over time. So when I grew up, I used to brush my teeth in the morning, and stand in line with my brothers for the one bathroom that we had for all of us. And now everybody has an en-suite, and everybody has an open kitchen. Our homes became more complicated, and that entails more risk to the home and also more premiums. And the point that I'm making is that, fine, if you have more bathrooms, and of course there's going to be more losses because there's only more water damage, but it also means that there's going to be more complexity in it.

Now, if you have a market that is that big, and there's only one player that is north of 10% in that State Farm, and then the second one is less than 10% of the market, so it's very, very fragmented, you can build a monster company by being the number 16th insurer, which of course is not our goal, but the point that I'm making is that it's not a winner take all. We are so wired for VC that Gardner is saying that by 2027, this market is going to be $2.7 billion, and then you have 15 companies chasing that. So it can be a really, really big company, or can be less than 1% in the market in like three years, and have one and a half-billion dollars in premiums. That's not a bad outcome. And I actually think this is just the beginning. So you have such a vast option to go up, it just uncapped.

My partner, Rick McCathron, who is our president, always says that "We're not even in the stage where we're collecting the low-hanging foods; we're still collecting the fruits from the floor." And my CMO always says, "And we're still hitting the watermelons when we're walking." It's such a vast market. We are so early in it that it's not about competition, there's more than one way to skin a cat. I don't need to cater to every customer, I just need to cater to the customers that we want. And they think that this is what they want; a more modern take on the insurance that's going to help them take care of their home in general. And I think there's a vast opportunity in that.

Patrick: [00:49:44] Let's go back to where we started, which is trench warfare. That is entrepreneurship. There's a lot of people that listen, that are just starting companies that are thinking about starting a company, it seems like hopefully, we'll be entering a new golden era for entrepreneurship after maybe a long period where there weren't enough entrepreneurs. The tooling you talked about is a big part of that, et cetera. I'd love to close our conversation by spending 10 minutes on this topic. Just what you've learned about this trench warfare, which is hard, it's really difficult, but ultimately really rewarding. Maybe we'll start there with the rewarding part; what is so rewarding about it? Why should people contemplating this life, do it?

Assaf: [00:50:10] Firstly, I think there are too many entrepreneurs, because it's easy and you can get money, a lot of people are in it for the wrong reasons, and people do not understand how tough it is. There's a mental toll, there is a psychological toll, it's not an easy thing. As we said, it's trench warfare, and it's fine to do it for a day or two but to do it for a long period of time, it's it has a toll. People always think that once you reach a certain scale, it becomes easy. It's really, really hard at the beginning, but once it's a big company... No, it's not. It's actually harder. I need to deliver on numbers, I have 500 people I need to take care of. It's not getting easier, but I do think that we're in a world where there's an abundance of tools, an abundance of capital now this is probably the golden era to do something. I'm talking more about technology ventures and things like that sort.

So I think technology saved the world in the last year, think about, what's the narrative for this craziness. I'm not talking just about the vaccination. You couldn't have got food home, you couldn't have done calls, you couldn't have done schooling. If this event would have happened 10 years ago, it would have been a very different kind of scenario. So we're a world where technology actually came and saved the world. You can actually see it in the public markets as well in the appreciation of what basically people would have put on technology stocks. So I think we are getting into an era that is kind of like a golden age, but it's not for the faint of heart, it's not easy. People should know that if you're doing it, you're doing it for the long term, and you're doing it because it's the right thing for you.

And it doesn't fit everybody. A lot of people are wired to... Someone tapped them in the back and said, "Oh, Patrick, that was a really good job." Nobody's going to give you a "Good job," or it's all about you. I think people need to be very honest. One of the things that it's very weird... You're a bipolar kind of person as an entrepreneur. You'll talk into the outside like everything is amazing and inside, it's gut-wrenching that nothing works. And you need to be very brutally honest in what doesn't work because otherwise, you can never fix it. And you have these two; on the outside, it's amazing, on the other side it's like, "Listen, guys, it's shit, it doesn't work." And it needs to be done all the time. A lot of people are not handling it very well, and it's something that is important, but there's always the saying that, it never goes up and to the right, it always up and down, and up and down, and eventually it's a very fragile beast. A startup is a very fragile beast; there are so many things that can kill you. Over time, you become more resilient, and there are fewer of these crushing moments, but in the beginning, the difference between success and not a success, it's super random. Many times, stuff that has nothing to do with you.

People should just be aware of what they're getting into and have honest discussions with each other on what it does entail. I'm actually not trying to dissuade people from doing it. It's magic for the people that want to do it. As I said, it's about choosing the team, choosing what you work and choosing the culture, which if you care about these things, then nothing is better. And we're in a world where wealth accumulation is becoming obscenely fast. It took centuries for the Rockefellers or whatever to build, and now in a span of four or five years, you have kids that are 27 years old who are becoming billionaires. The monetary price is also very, very high for people that are highly successful in entrepreneurship, which wasn't the case before.


 

Source: Company Presentation

Patrick: [00:53:43] It seems like there's a perverse set of expectations around the feeling of these rewards. Money is one reward. People that succeeded in this game tend to get very, very wealthy. Talk about what it's felt like to get very wealthy; has that ultimately been something that feels good? Is that what people should be aiming for? Or is this more about service, and people, and experience?

Assaf: [00:54:04] Getting wealthy is not a bad outcome. Let's be honest. It's not a bad outcome, but I think there's a certain level of wealth, which is almost immaterial and it's not about that. So for me, my biggest drive in life is learning, and it's about constant learning, and I think the pace of learning that you do as a CEO, running a startup, and that is growing, is insane. We can have a discussion on public markets IPOs, SPAC, and stuff like that, that six months before I didn't have a freaking clue what it means. Six months before, but you know, devices, systems, and sales, and you constantly have to reinvent yourself and learn which, that's the biggest driver on my life.

But wealth is good, and it's helpful, I think, up to a certain scale. There's a certain point that I get a lot more... Every person in Hippo has equity in the company. I mean, every person in the call center, every salesperson, every service person, have equity. And not negligible equity, by the way. So for me, there's more of joy in the hundreds of people that we have on our call centers, that some of them are going to be millionaires, and for a lot of them, they're going to make hundreds of thousands of dollars, which is life-changing money, more than an engineer here made X or Y. And you're going to have 15 other options later. The ability to influence and impact people that were out of this world is something that I get a lot of joy for and matters to me. And the fact that we're doing it as a team and not as a solo, kind of just the staff is doing it, is something that really, really is important to me.

Patrick: [00:55:39] I think it's a wonderful place to end and turn to my traditional closing question that I ask everybody, what is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Assaf: [00:55:37] Oh God, wow. I have 500 different thoughts that are popping into my mind. What's the meaning of, "Kind?" Is it like doing something that was unexpected that the distance between what you expected and what you got was so high? Was it something that a person did that was above and beyond? It's very easy for a person that has a lot of stuff to do, to be basically very kind, but people who couldn't, and gave you... So I don't have a good answer. I'm just sharing with you all of the craziness that goes in my mind now. The one theme that I have is that people choose to keep on working in Hippo and work with me every morning. So I think that smart, capable people always have an option. And I want people that come to work at Hippo to make the positive choice that this is what they wanted to do, not because they didn't have any other option and they need to bring bread to the staff because I think one of the people that we have in here are super talented and can work. So for me, there is an act of kindness by people that every morning choose that working in Hippo and working with me on this venture, this is what they are choosing to actually do, and I view it as one of the things that drive me, and really motivates me.

Patrick: [00:56:43] Assaf, I think if you looked up, "Entrepreneur" in the dictionary or the encyclopedia, you might find your picture there. I think you're just a sort of classic, quintessential builder. This has been so much fun to do together. Been really looking forward to it, did not disappoint, thank you so much for your time.

Assaf: [00:56:56] No, that was awesome. And as you know, I'm a big fan, so thank you so much for doing this with me.

Patrick: [00:57:00] Pleasure's all mine.

Created by @ekmokaya

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
