
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released May 23rd, 2022
Invest Like the Best
Tobi Lutke - Embrace the Unexpected
Tobi Lütke is the co-founder and CEO of Shopify. We cover Shopify’s evolution into the world of atoms-based building through Shopify’s fulfillment network, the value of infrastructure writ large, and the impact of market volatility on day-to-day business building.

00:00:00
01:24:52
Introduction
[00:02:13] Patrick: My guest today is Tobi Lütke, co-founder and CEO of Shopify. Having first spoken to Tobi at the beginning of the pandemic, just two months into it, this felt like an opportune moment to revisit Shopify and the world through Tobi's eyes. Among many things, we discussed Shopify's evolution into the world of atom-based building, through Shopify's fulfillment network, the value of infrastructure writ large, and the impact of market volatility on day-to-day business building. Please enjoy my conversation with Tobi Lütke.

Value of Infrastructure
[00:02:44] Patrick: Tobi, it is almost exactly two years to the day since we last did this. It was early May in 2020, there was still a ton of uncertainty related to COVID. I guess there still is some extent today, and the world in Shopify and lots of things have changed a tremendous amount. I know certain things haven't changed too. I've been really excited to do an updated version of our conversation and we'll bounce all over the place, but before we hit go here, we're having this fascinating conversation around the concept of infrastructure, generally speaking. I think it started with this idea that we might be about to come on stream to a lot of good, useful, new, history books written by people who are really there to see this stuff get built in the digital world. I'd love you to sum up that idea of what your interest is in infrastructure and the way that history is written. Even things like payback on infrastructure and the ways in which we might underestimate it. I think this is a great tone setter for what we're going to be talking about today.

[00:03:38] Tobi: I'm thrilled to be back. Thanks for having me and those were quite some two years and a lot has happened. I think people are just underestimating the value to society of infrastructure by some incredible factor, because you see these kind of things like the interstate system. How do you imagine this thing would've looked if these things wouldn't have been built? I'm not an atoms person, I'm more like a bytes person. I find that infrastructure, especially with software has this incredibly unreasonable leverage and unreasonable payback period and often we have these conversations about what's the state of planet earth. What are things truly like? Are things getting better? Are things getting worse? There's a lot of people sharing excellent opinions on these things.There's a website. I hope I say this right. I think what happened in 1971, it might be a different year, but something around that time, there's a collection of charts where once the right year comes around, a lot of numbers sort of disconnect from their previous correlations. I have no idea what happened in that year, but as a student of history and especially of digital history, increasingly I'm thinking about a very, very tangible thing that happened is that just simply most of the value creation in the world has slipped out of the things that is represented in GDPs, where a whole bunch of people built the upper net around this time then we got modern operating systems.

We've built a lot of silicon based computers in the nineties, but none of this was reflected anywhere. Dot com happened and everyone tried on the idea like that this tech could be very big and then found some of the ground truth to be wanting, but really sort of early mid 2000s, web 2.0 I think we call it or, at least coinciding with the emergence of that term, I think was the moment where the world of technology said, Hey, we actually know exactly how to provide value for everyone. We know exactly how to deliver services and goods and things over the internet.And by the way, there's a lot of tweaks on the intuitions that people develop in the physical world. Physical world is very rivalrous. If you build a bridge in one place, you probably don't build a bridge somewhere else. At some point in the world of atoms, things become zero sum, limited amount of attention at the very least and then resources as well. The digital word is different. Basically you have Turing machines, you load something on a silicon chip into memory, and then you apply electricity and you get this thing. Infrastructure and internet. I mean, I like to believe Shopify is infrastructure, but there's public domain libraries. Just pick one, you know, SQLite. It's like a library, probably none of your listeners have heard about, but you have probably like something to the tune of a hundred SQLite databases on your phone right now.

It's just file format of the world basically and increasingly runs more and more and more parts on servers as well. It's just this brilliant open public domain piece that was written by a team and great leadership, incredible conviction, but it's not software, it’s infrastructure. And now people are using it every day for different things. And no one has to decide if we use SQLite, that means someone else can also have SQLite because all of us just add electricity. What that stores then is like an unbelievable compounding value.Again, in a lot of the ways we look at the world through GDP and other things, it's impossible to capture the value that's created here. Everytime someone updates something on GitHub, theoretically, it can be copied infinite amounts of times. These are not new ideas I'm sharing here, obviously. In a way, we've talked about this zero marginal cost of software and of course it powers a lot of value in a lot of software companies. I'm starting to believe that we haven't fully set this idea to its logical conclusion. How much of a change will this cause over the next while?

[00:07:18] Patrick: If you think about its compounding effects and the return or payoff pattern to infrastructure in general, do you think that's the reason why certainly in the world of atoms, it seems like we're unwilling to re-up the same way we did and say it under Eisenhower the 1950s or something doesn't seem to be that will, because it's very expensive. It takes a long time to build and then it's a very long lived asset and maybe digital those things were all exacerbated. Do you think that in general, we're also not building enough digital infrastructure given this idea? It certainly seems like Shopify and others are building tons of tooling. APIs are everywhere. This is a big trend, but is one of the conclusions from this it's not nearly big enough because of its potential payoff?

[00:07:58] Tobi: There wasn't a lot until recently. I think there's been a counter swing. I think we will only feel the effects of this, even blockchains, infrastructure, you put a smart contract on a blockchain it'll also run forever. In fact, the smart contracts that people put on blockchains are potentially the pieces of software that will live the longest. They might be still executable and callable in millions of years. In some cases. Now I'm making a very big assumption of the future viability of blockchains, but assuming blockchains are going to be part of what we'll do, they'll be around, which is exciting. That's the equivalent of a park. Your city builds a park, that's a piece of infrastructure. That park can be used for events. All sorts of new things can be done with that. We could make open source code, which was the blueprints, which then could be loaded into Turing machines, but we didn't have persistent Turing machines that forever execute, which we do now have, although very inefficiently right now.

So I think a lot of pieces are being put in place for kind of a new deal on the internet. Hosting is becoming much simpler again. Work GitHub has been done over the last 15 years, is very underappreciated in the way it created a community around people just sort of helping each other. You see increasingly really great companies that are just really either all in on infrastructure like Twilio or Stripe or Adyen, or like take a lot of this infrastructure, add a little bit of its own infrastructure, but really customize it in such a way that it's super available to non-technical people like that's I think what Shopify is doing. Obviously, I think this is insanely valuable. I spent all my day working on these kind of things and I like to invoke all this because I think maybe sort of I'm feeling the times, but there isn't a lot of optimism around and I feel there's so much to be optimistic about and so I’m trying to apply a little counterforce to that particular pendulum.

[00:09:44] Patrick: Yeah. It's amazing how much prevailing market conditions and prices can impact people's mood. We'll talk about that a little bit later, sticking with infrastructure though. I wonder if you've developed any principles or principle thinking around what makes for better infrastructure or valuable infrastructure to build. And I asked this question from a place of Shopify zone history. When we last talked a lot of the things that if you go to Shopify's website and see what you can do as a merchant didn't even exist two years ago. So you've obviously had to make choices. We're going to build this. We're going to not build this. What do you think about in terms of just base level principles that help you with decision making, for what kind of infrastructure to build that will have the most leverage in the world?

[00:10:23] Tobi: There are some guiding principles in Shopify product that really help us make these decisions. For instance, there's a very basic sentence, which actually does a lot of work within the company. “Shopify wants to make the important easy and everything else possible.” Probably everyone who listens to this has bought from Shopify stores. You might have not known that it was a Shopify store because they look very, very different. This is powered by a template language I wrote forever ago called Liquid. Basically the merchants can open a text editor and just make their website look however they want, or buy a theme from someone. That's infrastructure in a way, because here's something I learned about infrastructure, which might sound very abstract, but maybe it's useful. If you imagine an hourglass. An hourglass has sort of a narrow waist at some point, maybe a comic book version of an hour glass is like two triangles, inverted pointing at each other. Great infrastructure can be done when you can define what this sort of narrow waist is between the triangles. For instance, let's use Stripe because it makes this point I think quite well. There's one triangle on top, which is the internet, and all the engineers, and all the developers. They have a set of desires. They want to accomplish tasks, which involve movement of money. And then there's a bottom triangle, which is like a world of COBOL code in banks. There's a lot going on. And a lot of things you need to know, but if you manage to create a thin waist in this case, in the form of an API, now you have an agreement in the middle. This almost acts as a protocol. Here's the fantastic thing. Once this protocol exists, it actually allows the two triangles to be replaced over time. In the case of something like Shopify, Liquid is again this templating language. People can write it. If you wrote some in 2005, the first time the Shopify went into Beta, it will still work.

Shopify is the Ship of Theseus. Nothing about Shopify is the same. The Liquid part has been rewritten many, many times, everything changed about the triangle below. Everything changed about the triangle above. Most people don't actually even write Liquid. They actually just use drag and drop editor, which we built on top, which then writes the Liquid for you. The amazing thing is, again, once the protocol has been defined, once the demarcation line has been created, once the narrow risk is defined, then really incredible things can happen because as long as the thing keeps working, that's in the middle, you can evolve all the pieces. And I think that's a really, really, really powerful idea for product creation. People encounter this. If you've ever queried a database again, you use sequel and that's just a thin waist system. It's an agreed upon system, which gets you the data and as long as you keep it simple, if you send something to Microsoft SQL Server or SQLite, you'll get the answer assuming they have the data. So that idea unlocks, I think, the right approach to internet infrastructure creation, because once these protocols have been defined, teams can go and saying, okay, these sort of made this work with duct tape and regular expressions in terms of Liquid, but let's build this up properly, scale it out, make it so that people can use this from now on forever.

[00:13:16] Patrick: So someone once explained it to me as the equivalent of an outlet in your wall, that's become standard that anything you plug into it like electricity flows through it very reliably and in a way that's a standard or a protocol or something that is sitting right next to us all day every day, that without it, who knows what would've been invented. I'm also struck by the examples being the choke points, if you will, the most basic natural things that humans have been doing forever, like Stripe people in paying stuff, Twilio, communicating, Shopify, selling, buying. How much do you think just that is the guide for good infrastructure just looking for the longest lasting perennial human use cases and then starting from there? Maybe they've all been mined. I'm curious how much room you think there is left to go talking, paying, some of these things I've listed are like the major human motions. But I think my sense from you is that we're still pretty early in digital infrastructure building. So how do you think about that?

[00:14:10] Tobi: Some parts are and some aren't. It's sometimes very, very surprising, which ones aren't. Other things that are very, very long lasting is ownership. People like owning things. We like to acquire assets. We like to have title to them. This is not just the utilitarian value. This is also for starters and for all sorts of reasons that are uniquely human and we didn't have good infrastructure for this. We probably still have not great infrastructure for this. It's just barely becoming possible to own things on the internet. I think there's lots of white space.I do fully agree though that one of the best things you can spend some time thinking about is what are things that people have been doing for a very long time. If I've been doing something for a very long time, like making something on the internet that taps into this emotion or into this sense for community or whatever that is you identified. I think you can analyze almost every major success story in the digital space right now and you really see a digital version of something that people have already been doing, which tells you how early it is. They're pre the emergence of new things. Maybe the video game world is sort of there, but I think we are spending our time on computers, on the internet, very, very different right now than people will in 20 years from now. So there's plenty of opportunity to be part of being pioneers.

[00:15:21] Patrick: So when you think about this applied specifically to Shopify and let's just call it like a funnel of ideas for marginal infrastructure that could get built, or I guess, improvements to existing pieces of infrastructure. How does that funnel work? How are ideas fed into the top of it? What are the layers of decision making that ultimately lead to something getting green lit? What is the way that that product funnel works, given the amount of white space that might exist?

[00:15:47] Tobi: We were talking about last time, the sort of difference over the last two years. I think that we've gotten a lot better at this and spent a lot of time thinking about this because frankly here's an experience I've had. When the COVID pandemic and the stay at home orders happened and we all did that two years ago. It was very clear that this is going to be a very, very, very white knuckle affair for everyone. There was untold stories there still, like, I mean, the world almost ran out of service in a very significant way, but probably most people don't quite understand how close of a call that was. If COVID would've happened like two years before, I'm not sure we could have pulled off, not we as in Shopify, but the internet. The Cloud hosting providers, they're like very close to food rationing. A lot happened during this time. I pulled the entire list of things that everyone was working on and basically recalibrated everything from like, does this help right now? I'm a very vocal proponent of long term thinking. People should make decisions based on the decision they assume the company 10 years from now wishes they would've done, but sometimes you got to just look at what's there and be very, very practical. So I went through. In the end, I think I stopped about 60% of what we were working on. None of the things we were working on was because people made incorrect choices. Sometimes just maybe not quite applying the larger frame of reference.

For instance, there's a lot of projects to customize Shopify to be better for brochures and so on. I understand the pitch of like that's so and so big market and if you just get 1%, this is not my favorite form of communication, but I recognize that it happens. So a lot of the projects have been going on we're trying to drag Shopify into adjacencies. I'm a very firm believer that you have to pick your place and then try to be ideal for that. And actually maybe to a certain point actually discourage people to pull your product into areas it's not meant for, because Shopify should be the best piece of software everyone uses who's in our space. Because like cheap, and fast, and delightful, and is an integration point, and simplifies the business, and magically anticipates the next step, and has something, a product, good service for you that can just help you do your thing. Shopify wants to be the mushroom to Mario or the fire flower to Mario, or just give you powers that are awesome. Moving it in all these adjacencies increases the TAM, but it stratifies it into concentric circles. For some people it's going to be ideal in this way, but for many people it will be just never quite there. And I think that can actually have some really negative effects for feedback and all these kind things on companies.

Anyway, from this, we learn we need to have a really good mechanism by which we get the best of what we have. Shopify is very bottoms up. People can write proposals for every opportunity they see that goes into a system called GSD, which stands for get shit done. Then there's these phases there's proposal phase, prototype phase, build phase, and a releasing phase, and this system allows everyone in the company to see everything that's going on. This entire plan once a year I write product themes for a company, things that we cause to make true over the year. And then they sort of decompose into different projects. Then as this proposal is submitted for transition to the build phase or to prototype phase, and then we can have great conversations about, is this a not yet? Is this a hell yes? Where does this go in a priority stack? And I think building this out has been incredibly clarifying and very, very good for the company. So a lot of the work I think over the last two years has been to get companies just really, really, really aligned on their missions. Companies can get very, very distracted in a lot of ways when they allow themselves to do things that aren't the mission. This is especially true in a world of product. Again, if you follow a moving into adjacencies, I don't think you will have a world class product in your adjacencies. You're not out competing someone's main mission with your side quest.

[00:19:33] Patrick: If we go back in time and think about the number of potential ways or companies trying to solve this kind of problem, eCommerce infrastructure, there were a lot of them through history and Shopify has emerged as the clear winner I would say, or the default, as if you're going to build an online presence you do with Shopify and there's other options, but it's sort of the default mode. Is there anything that you most attribute that success to in 2005 through, let's say through 2020, then we'll talk about this kind of modern era as a separate segment and popping to mind is we're talking about finite infinite games, the great James Carse book and this great talk that I love called inventing on principle. You started this to sell snowboards. I don't know how much of this was a grand ambition of yours versus the unfolding of following a certain set of principles. So I would love just like level set on that early period and why you think you won relative to a lot of people trying to solve a similar problem.

[00:20:29] Tobi: It's really hard to attribute it to one thing. I can guess the things that contributed. I mean, luck and timing. People luck, timing luck. All these things are really, really big factors in here. And I think Shopify succeeded, if you press me on one thing, it's people luck. We've had an incredibly hardworking, aligned team of people who work together for a very long time and like all fall in love with the problem. And have a curiosity wanting to understand every atom of a space we are trying to solve problems in and through the group and through the chats, like manage to see what ought to exist rather than about what does, and that is a vision. And that is a thing that you can then execute against. James Carse's book is really meaningful to me, partly because I love the way he describes what infinite journeys are. He talks about it like you start with some kind of a vision set out towards some horizon that you find interesting. Starting out on curiosity. The goal is not trying to reach horizon because that would make it a finite game. The goal is actually just make it towards horizon so that you gain more vision. I find that cycle to be intoxicating. I love thinking about Shopify as a journey, because again, I sold snowballs and I built software in an obscure Japanese programming language, which captured everyone's imagination and pushed attention to my snowboard store, which felt very unearned, but sort of happened. The other thing that James

Carse talks about in his book is that the biggest functional difference between people engaged in playing finite games, something like tennis, where you're trying to win based on score, or infinite games is a relationship to change. If you are playing a finite game, the rules need to be defined ahead of time because there's a winning condition and if a game's over, then all participants agree it's over because some condition has been met. The infinite game has no such facility. In fact, all change is interesting. Change actually causes the journey to go differently, go more precisely. You work on it. Frankly, that's also useful psychology right now and for all of the last two years that this decade seems to be really prioritizing rewarding the adaptable. If your reaction to change is fight it and try to revert to what has been before, I think you're in for a really bad time. This is meaningful to me and it's the way I've been thinking about the company. I think this attitude, partly itself, has caused some of the success, frankly, because I'm surprised all the things that fell into scope for us. Because again, when I started, Shopify is by no means the first eCommerce software company. There were a lot of other things there, and there was an entire industry. So this was reasonably established, but I never felt I joined that industry, but I solved problems that took me through this terrain. I think that's helpful because there was also a point of sale industry, which I don't think that's a separate thing. You're solving a similar problem in another form factor. Usually, it should be connected to the same infrastructure in the end. That was obvious to us. And then all the work we've done through multichannel.

Shopify is playing a very different role. It's your data warehouse. Sometimes it's your business coach, it's your bank, your financier. It plays a role that is hugely utilitarian to a kind of people who are engaged with the entrepreneurial journey. That has never been defined by someone saying, "This is the confines of an industry," but it's actually been set by us just keeping on this journey and figuring out where to go next, always talking a lot with our customers and having a really good understanding for the challenges they face. And I think this takes us into all these places that we could never have anticipated. Like now, we are building warehouses and robots and all these kind of things. I didn't think that would be part of a journey, but it clearly is. And I think it's good to be humble and not have too many assumptions about the future, but rather develop a very, very strong sense of; figure out what's right. What is their overwhelming evidence for? And then react to that.

Shopify Fulfillment Network
[00:24:22] Patrick: People are probably less familiar with that example you ended on, Shopify fulfillment network. I would love just to take that as a microcosm of these ideas and maybe explain literally what it is to people. But I'm especially interested in its evolution. Why, obviously you were incredibly good at purely digital infrastructure. And one of the things that's interesting that's happened in COVID is forced the digital and the physical to smash together out of necessity, as you pointed out, thank God for the internet during COVID, and pushed everyone into this intersection unless often atoms or bits only. Maybe start by saying, what is Shopify network today? And then really, I'd love to hear on how it evolved and how it began, because I think it would be a great way to get into your company in your head about this kind of decision making and where to go next.

[00:25:09] Tobi: I'm on WhatsApp threads with probably 100 merchants. And from all backgrounds, I just talk to people and then I upgrade us into a chat. And then we talk about what works, and what doesn't. And very quickly, this usually becomes talk about the business rather than the software, because the software hopefully works really well. But that's actually even more helpful because it just gives you a sense for where do things get really complicated? Our observation with Shopify has always been that the journey is uphill. It's not easy. Shopify never claims it is. Entrepreneurship is fundamentally a little bit unreasonable. There's wonderful quotes, not by me, where people point out that you end up spending 100 hours a week working for yourself so you don't have to work 40 hours for someone else. Often this doesn't make sense, but again, for some people it's super important. And frankly, for our economies, it's really important that people do this because most people in the world are employed by small and medium businesses. There's about five and a half million people employed by the millions of merchants on Shopify. And that's very, very meaningful. We talk with them. What we found is it's an uphill journey, which is okay. Everyone's willing to do this because it's very gritty people who embark. But if it becomes a technical climb, it filters out a lot of people.

A lot of people just opt out of the journey, basically just forgo future growth at a point where things become very, very obscure. This actually started really early. Once upon a time, for instance, actually one example was just getting a payment gateway. I know this sounds crazy that the internet was ever like this. But when Shopify started and saw a lot of parts of the internet, it was very hard to get a payment gateway. That's trivial now because it's built in, you just get one. So we build up the infrastructure, us and our partners to just underwrite people. And then this particular technical climb disappears. It becomes just a slope, which again, everyone will continue on. You actually have more entrepreneurship because some obstacle like this was overcome. Think about the importance of tooling infrastructure and also UX here. There are significantly more people employed today because of good UX and not getting people to be stuck and integrating more. I think this is really overlooked part of the effects of this type of friction. This is really how Shopify thinks about what we do next. People have lots of problems accessing capital from banks. Banks have in charter that the point of why they get these privileges, especially retail banks, which they have, is so that they lend money to small businesses, because that's, again, a huge return on investment for society if that happens. However, banks do not want to do this anymore. You have to give up. And some point realistically, that's how it should work. But in reality, they want to lend money to companies that have huge revenue, it's lower risk. It makes sense, but that means they disappeared from playing an important infrastructure role in society. So then we have Shopify capital, because people are willing to be underwritten and for advances, and again, their business can grow significantly only even there's capital available to grow business. We are going through all the obstacles.

The one that just is a slam dunk thing is it depends on your product somewhat, but at some point, you really have to have a plan for how to get to at least two day, ideally, overnight delivery for products you have. In the past, it was an experience unlike anything else entrepreneurs have done to this point. When they decided to go into a new channel, like sell on Facebook, on Meta or Instagram, that was a click of an app which they added. And when they did that, that's how people are used to growing their business. Getting logistics set up is work with whatever factory and contact manufacturer you have, figure out freight across the Atlantic and Pacific. You then have to find warehouses, it is a completely different world, which involves a lot of different people to talk to and complexities. It just felt very obviously in scope for a long time, that at some point we have to solve this. In fact, I started talking with the board of directors and they wisely told me that this was too early, over 10 years ago, wanting to go into this direction. I think this is important to say. We are doing this not because we want to be in the logistics space, we rather actually don't want to be going into the logistics space. Although it is wonderful and fascinating, and there's lots we can actually bring given our unique experience about processes and digitalization, technology, and digital infrastructure and whatnot. But integrating end-to-end is one of the goals we have. We would like to get to the point where running a sizable retail business could, if you choose, be treated as passive income. We want to automate as many parts of it as possible so that you and your team can focus on product creation, which is the most valuable thing you can be doing. Doing undifferentiated work, figuring out where you have packages, to me that is the digital system just should really know where packages are. Otherwise, what the hell is going on? That's not differentiated work.

Now, we found that the more entrepreneurs end up spending time on their product, the better the products get, and this is one of the wonderful things about the direct to consumer world that emerged in the last few years that there's much more alignment between the people making the products and the people getting them. And they're happy to send feedback. And there's no reductionist channel and merchandising team in the middle that optimizes your products for being easy to stack or just a higher profit margin so you can compete against other products around it in the eye high shelf space in the supermarkets. Those are all influences on products that don't lead to better products. And I think this is actually at the root of a lot of the criticism about disposable consumerism that I think is being leveled. It's not because people love stuff. It's because people hate the stuff they get. We are starting some of the processes and helping getting people to have this direct relationship, which just leads to actual Allbirds, like wonderful products like this, which are clearly just built with feedback from the people who wear them and want to recommend them. I think that works better for everyone and it's what we want to see more of.

[00:31:03] Patrick: With something like this in particular, thinking back to your point about, you got to be careful about which adjacencies you get dragged into. Obviously, logistics is firmly in the vertical of core muscle movements or something, whatever you want to call it for a merchant that's selling online. They have to get their stuff to places. What lessons have you learned entering into a much more atoms-driven world in terms of what good product means? What is a good fulfillment network? I wouldn't know how to answer that question. Obviously, there's the 800 pound gorilla and Amazon that proves you can build incredible logistics networks over time. I mean, it's just a very different kind of calculus than a great new piece of software, which I don't think anyone would say Amazon builds great software. They seem to build great infrastructure. What have you learned about that? Is it radically different than what makes you good at software? Or is it a different set of skills required than what makes you good at software to be excellent at fulfillment and logistics?

[00:31:59] Tobi: Yeah, I think so. We tend to talk a lot about intuition because intuition is also one of those underestimated things. Intuition is actually all of your life knowledge channeled quickly. I always recommend people to actually actively build their intuition for kinds of problems they want to solve in their career. There's this uncanny thing. People were just incredible, effective, and so on. They can look at an architectural drawing and instantly tell you if it's good or not. And then they need to think maybe 10 minutes to figure out what the problem is. But something pinged their brain about maybe call it weak signal detection like, "There's something wrong here."And I think this is the way intuition can be really helpful, but you have to understand that it's task-based. Intuition built in world of bytes is not good intuition in your world of atoms. Actually, you almost want to get away from having the people who have that kind of intuition make choices. And the other thing, sometimes the bytes people end up being the most useful people in the meetings because, of course, everyone with industry experience will understand how things are. And a lot of engineers have a really good ability to think from first principles and just figure out that's what it is, but what ought it to be? How could this all work together? And then you don't just pivot to that. You figure out from now on, every step we do, everything we implement, how can we make it so that we can get closer to the ideal eventually? That's a humility that's really, really important. What does good look like? I mean, good looks like if we can put on a website that this thing will be with you tomorrow and then it does, that's good.

At some point, this crunches together to SLAs. It becomes quantifiable in this way. And you're right. Another thing you can do is also look at what Amazon build. And that's also very, very good. Shopify's relationship with Amazon, the media is trying to make this very zero sum. We treat them as a very worthy rival. Sometimes you ask or say what you can learn from them? And sometimes you ask what you can do better from them. And I hope they treat us the same as well. But again, and in those circumstances, I'll be thinking about how to capture pieces of pies from our competitors, actually ever. Positive sum thinking is so valuable because it's amazing how often people are trying to compete for pieces of pies rather than just grow markets. Everything about the Shopify journey has convinced me it really doesn't pay to really have market analysis. Well known venture capitalists passed on Shopify in 2008, partly because there was only 40,000 online stores and that was not a big enough market for the investment. And I'm still disappointed with that because I realized, especially venture capitalists should not make this particular category mistake. If it's common there, it's clearly common everywhere.

[00:34:36] Patrick: I love this idea that if you bring this person into the atoms conversation, their intuition may just be wrong. In what ways is it most commonly wrong?

[00:34:45] Tobi: I mean, change management for software is deploy. Change management of people is a project that's going to take you a while. The cost to switch is significantly higher. There really is a long itinerary of things that are wrong. It's useful, but it's useful as an input, not useful as a, "Let's do that thing." This goes beyond engineers, of course. Even UX has been really interesting because for instance, we’re designing UX for robotics. You scan an item, it goes onto a Chuck is what the robots are called, and the Chuck does the heavy lifting of moving it around. Just let the associates do the things that they uniquely can do well, and let the robots do the stuff that they don't actually like doing. That's the way we build our robotics, but this requires a very interesting human interaction design that ought to not wind up annoying after a while. And I think that's really important. And designing interfaces that people are using every minute is different from software that people sign up once and then process some orders in every day. People that just have to recalibrate. I think that's also makes our work really fun.

[00:35:50] Patrick: You mentioned earlier this notion that maybe the factor is a 100X that were underestimating the potential impact of especially close to zero marginal cost digital infrastructure. When you've approached the Shopify network, how has it felt to be much more tied to real napkin math, return on investment math, higher CapEx? To use a crazy example, no one buys an apartment expecting it to a 100X. It's not going to happen. There's limiters that don't exist in the digital world and the physical, and therefore the math behind it all, the return on investment, and the ways it impacts the ecosystem maybe are more measurable. Do you think that's true? And how much does that figure into your decisions on how to, when to, where to build the fulfillment network?

[00:36:30] Tobi: You can attack the fulfillment network with Excel spreadsheets, and ideally you encode confidence factors into a whole lot of your numbers. I always chafe a little bit about spreadsheets lead to fake certainty, and very often the spreadsheet ends up winning the meeting. And I find that there's a lot of ways how that can go very wrong. I'm encouraging people to next to ideally to every column that has an assumption in, put your confidence in. And then instead of having a final number about what's best, I want to see the error margins. Anyway, I think partly about it like this, because it needs to make sense on this level as well. But I see the real benefit of a fulfillment network actually totally differently. I want Shopify to be magic product that can accept money in whatever way the planet earth conspires to move money around. It can do your brand justice in making you look fantastic in whatever channel you choose to be represented in. And then it will get your customers to be incredibly delighted with the experience of buying from you, by making the things show up the next day. And a magic internet site that solves all those kind of problems so that you can just really make the product.

It's very hard to capture this in spreadsheets on SFN alone. I think it's actually important for the story of what Shopify is becoming, and it's exactly this infinite game thing that's being really honed in here because I want people to say that Shopify is ideal when you're starting a new retail business. It's simply the ideal software. My work is to make it so that people who, for whatever reason choose not to use Shopify, make a huge strategic mistake. I don't control people's choices. I control only our choices. We need to show up with the best thing that this particular assemblage of people can create. In the end, it's very hard to quantify the effects of something like the fulfillment network. Again, I'm comfortable with unquantifiables. We really should double click on this a bit because it is a very recurring topic. I do think that somewhere around the time VisiCalc got invented, or when we first started bringing in spreadsheets, think about that piece of infrastructure and how much value that's created in the world. I think it's a little bit of a victim of its own success because it's been so useful, especially to the world that existed when it first came around. You know the old, "All models are wrong, but some models are useful"? That's true with spreadsheets, too. I would say that there's an unbelievable competition for everything in the world that's quantifiable, partly because people are guided into this space by spreadsheets.

There's a primacy to making decisions this way. Where the Venn diagram of value you can create and value you can directly quantify is like a very small overlap. I would say it's probably 80% of a value that's there can't really be quantified because it hits you in second order effects. Even when you value companies, how do you value a company like Shopify? Obviously people are, but the best thing we have ever figured out to do is create a market and observe buying and selling patterns. Although, as we all know, there's a huge multiplier on confidence in the future encoded in this so that this can swing significantly while the company actually it's fair market value is clearly only increasing because it's launching awesome stuff. So it's a zig-zag somewhere that has the actual real market value, presumably somewhere in the space traversed, but it doesn't spend a whole lot of time in it, I think, or closer. I think that we just have to be comfortable with things like taste, for things like intuition, with things like that's awesome. If you do something and say, "That's awesome," I don't know how to put that into the spreadsheet. But I can tell you it's going to be reflected in the numbers if a lot of people agree with it. I don't think Shopify can succeed in the long term if you're not comfortable with building things purely for the unquantifiable with some semblance of faith in the second and third order effects being good for the spreadsheets.

[00:40:25] Patrick: One of the most interesting parts of our discussion last time was this obvious tension that I think you've lived with and held. And obviously, we talked a lot this time and last time about wonderful product. And then obviously, the other side of every business is distribution. And really, I think the Shopify merchant's responsibility as you described it last time was create a great product and sell it. Get people that it would be appropriate for to know it exists and to want be interested in it and buy it. And then everything else, we'll do for you. I really enjoyed that discussion about as Shopify becomes more ubiquitous and used by more and more merchants, how do you make sure you're not the aggregator that sits on top and you're the brand in the background? And then I'll go back to the infinite games, Horizon. One of the things that popped on the Horizon was the IDFA change, which materially impacts the way that Shopify merchants are trying to reach and sell their product to their customers. Has your view evolved or changed on this at all? Shopify's role in the potential for distribution for its merchant partners and even a centralized role that it could play? The Shop app came out after our first conversation. How has your view changed at all through COVID on this idea of distribution and whether or not you should play a role?

[00:41:36] Tobi: My view has been, if you do it, we have to be very careful about it. And I think that has not changed. It's a complex topic. TheATT changes are interesting. And what may really highlight is just things on the internet are fleeting. And I advertised my snowboards in 2004. I was the only person bidding on the keywords for all the ski resorts. That's also a very different internet. Things change, opportunities arise, and some opportunities are closed. The ATT changes specifically. I mean, they captured everyone's imagination. I don't actually think they're even amongst the largest changes that have happened. They are unfortunate changes, partly because I think small businesses ended up in a crosshair and potentially in a friendly fire of something unrelated. They're not a huge change. It's something like five to 10%, maybe. The one thing about them, and this is why I really particularly dislike them is because it's not an even distribution across everyone. If you have a pretty mass market product, you’re probably not affected at all. It's very regressive. The people who are most affected are the people making the products at the intersection of three different things. The electric skateboards for people who like technology and skateboarding. Some of the products that are doing really well in Shopify are intersections three layers across, finding the set of 1,000 true fans that really need something like that. That specific thing has gotten harder, which unfortunately, also is usually the smallest of the merchants. Other ones are just starting because a lot of the white space is in finding your unique niche. In a way I think ATT changes caused some very regrettable situation where it's fine for people who are already big, but devastating or at least 30% impacting, which sometimes is entire margin for the people who ought to build businesses. And we would like to see succeed.

To a certain degree, probably discovery is being dragged out of us in Shop, is something that clearly we users of Shop really want from us. I think doing a really good job, coming up with new ideas, new shopping surfaces, which are non rivalrous between all the merchants to a degree that's possible. But that's really early. The Shopify audiences product, which can help a little bit with finding these more niche audiences. Now, that's a very early product, which is currently aimed at plus merchants. There's an ambition to bring this further because we really care about getting people through the starting period. But there's also some opportunities for helping people with their first sales. My ideal situation here would be, help as much as we can, get past the cold start problem, and then potentially as they get larger, help them figure out their broader marketing approaches through data analysis, potentially models, potentially audience creation based on your own data. But this is all very early, very influx. I would say though, that new opportunities for advertising keep coming around, like connected TV is becoming more of a thing. And radio ads actually turn out to be underutilized now, because a lot of money has shifted into other channels. And then new attention platforms are coming along all the time. I think the important thing for us is, we want to help people be able to take advantage of what other people have built. And as much as we can do something ourselves, that's also good, but I don't think it's utterly necessary for the success.

[00:44:50] Patrick: I have a friend that jokes, on long enough timeline, any big enough business sells ads. And it's a funny conception, but it's just funny how many times it serves to be true. It sounds like in this case, what you're saying is, there's going to be a lot of places where you can get the attention of the customer and you have to be creative and you have to adapt. The keyword, start getting higher, et cetera. But that this is maybe a good example of Shopify not getting dragged into an adjacency. Do what you can to support it. But ultimately it is the responsibility of the merchant to know how this works, and evolve and adapt.

[00:45:22] Tobi: Finding product market fit is square in the center of a particular vertical slice that we want to help people. I really like Kevin Kelly's 1000 true fans essay. Finding your first 1000 true fans is just an objective in the beginning. I think the internet should conspire to make that possible for people. And we will work hard on trying to make it easier as well, especially because lately, as you see, it's becoming harder.

Managing the Business Through Market Volatility
[00:45:44] Patrick: You said something earlier about the fair market value of the company, probably being, maybe there's some jaggedness to it, but it's a fairly steady line. And then I was thinking about this analogy of a guy walking through central park from corner to corner at a 45 degree angle. And that fair market value is sort of the guy walking, and he is walking his dog on a long leash, and the dog is running on either side of the fair market value. Sometimes that's what the stock market looks like or the price for a given stock. What has it been like managing through a very, at first upside volatile and then downside volatile stock price, knowing from our first conversations and other times we've talked that this is obviously not something that you or you want the employees to be focused on. But nonetheless, is an input into the business, if you need capital or want to sell shares or buy shares or whatever. What lessons have you learned managing this where, maybe the best performing stock added the most market cap of any company. And then there's been growth, multiple contraction on the other side in 2022. Tell me everything you can about what you've learned managing through this and what you've found to be important?

[00:46:43] Tobi: I think the really important thing is, what's the relationship between a company and the stock? And we talk about this internally and I think that's serving us really well. We are not our stock. Our stock is a marker. People forget this, but the stock price is set by someone making a sell decision and someone making a buy decision. People coming to an agreement at this particular number, and that goes into the tickers. We’re not in offices anymore, but all our offices are connected to an electricity grid. I don't think you can really predict how well the company is doing based on how much energy it's consuming. It's related to what's being done, but it doesn't represent some kind of incredible wisdom of a company. Shopify has huge potential. I think that's quite clear to the people who observe the company, it plays a super important role to its customers. And it's just a good deal. I think it's a very focused company, that's building great product, in a space that's super valuable, all these kind of things. So you see this and what you do I think is, you do an internal check about like, "Hey, how optimistic am I about the future?" Then you take whatever you see with the company and you multiply it with that thing. And then the end result is going to be something that you're willing to engage in a trade with. Now, if the world changes a lot and everyone's optimistic-ness is canceled for the time being, then suddenly you're multiplying with a very, very, very low number, and then you just trade at that. Shopify has the pleasure and displeasure of being a large modifier very affected by people's read about future and markets and economies. So I think that's been interesting. Friends have encouraged me to sometimes share some of these things that we have discussed internally on Twitter. And then now plenty of IR people are encouraging me to stop doing that as well. So it's certainly on both sides of this.

I think things get really bad when people are making decisions based on the stock. Outside of, for their personal portfolio buying or selling, that's your decision that you can make with a stock because that's the one thing it's authoritative over. I want Shopify to be like a really, really high quality winning sports team. Some people describe a company as family. I just don't find that to be a really good analogy. I like professional sports team better. Does anyone believe that the team members in a sports team check the betting markets before the game? Maybe they do. But when you are in front of a goal as a striker, you should think about, can you score? Not, what's the betting market say? And then change your decision based on this. This is the tweet I made. And then people said, "Well, what about stock based compensation?" I was talking about decision making. I also get that part, and that causes some conversations inside of companies, for sure. I think all of these acute micro challenges like this can be handled during a downturn. Again, back to intuition. I think in good times, everyone's intuition are largely proxies to what companies ought to be doing. Probably 80% of the random unsolicited feedback you get is actually something you should take very seriously. I think during downturns - a reason why I think a lot of companies end up washing out doing downturns is because, during the good times, especially 13 years of good times, you end up in a pattern that you just end up caring or even prioritizing what other people think. And you are running the company on a say so of some kind of group consensus.

I think in downturns, you really have to have a vision that you're following. Frankly, your moves are not going to be intuitively the right moves. You really need those asbestos pants in those times to deal with this. I think a lot of companies aren’t willing to do this. So tying this all back to the stock. I spend super little time thinking about this. Again, I work all day on fair market value of business. Other people buy and sell. That's eventually convergent again on whatever the fair market value might be. And that's how I think about it. That's how I teach it to people inside of a company. And that's the entire thing. Now, sure, you have some moves you can do, especially if you want to use stock for M&A during good times. But frankly, if you raised cash during previous times and now you can deploy it, then you're in very good shape. But prudent money management, I think, involves raising money for rainy days, which I think most companies have executed really well this cycle, which is also different from times past, I think.

[00:50:54] Patrick: It's fascinating to think about, it seems to be in the cross hairs again for people, the relationship between capital markets and companies, where for a long period of time, especially in technology, capital was sort of like a faucet that you turned on and off. And maybe we're going through a protracted downturn here, and that will be different again. How much do you think about the capital allocation piece of Shopify as it grows? Things like share issuance, share buybacks, maybe would be the question today as the multiples come way down. You already addressed M&A and the potential for arbitrage there. This is a very different thing than focusing on product driven, fair market value. But how much do you think about some of those bigger capital allocation decisions and the ways that it might impact everything that matters to you at Shopify?

[00:51:37] Tobi: Capital allocation is the name of the entire game. Finding a team that's working on something is a huge expense. At some point, show me your roadmap and I will show you your actual strategy. Obviously, the deep financial ones, share buybacks and capital raises, are the top of the iceberg of capital allocation work, which are observable by everyone from great distance. I think people who have built good companies with good unit economics are good capital allocators at the end of the day. Different tools come out during different times, and we will use every tool that's available. Shopify's not immune to the sunk cost fallacy, but I think it's better than most companies. We don't really have sacred cows in these ways. If something makes sense, it makes sense. I personally bought some Shopify shares. Could think about a share buy-back for Shopify but there's a lot of things going on that make that hard. So it's probably not the best use of Shopify's capital, but as an outsider during an open trading window, that seems like really good investment.

Shopify was profitable as a private company, then it was profitable again as a venture backed company. It has been profitable for times as a public company. I'm a card carrying member of a club of people who says that companies ought to make money at some point. I do find it's important that people look at the unit economics independently, because if they're really good and a company invests of course a lot, then that's a very different thing. I'm not saying anything crazy, because there's been lots of fantastic companies that can be observed with this lens. I think everyone's fine with this. The way you do anything is how you do everything. If you're on a journey, you have to be good at being on this journey. And being good on the segment of a journey is different from good times, compared to tough times. I would like my work to be judged based on, "Did I do the right thing from a long term perspective, given the macro situation? The water Shopify was swimming in at the time, that's the way I think about it.

[00:53:25] Patrick: Do you have any advice for company leaders that are trying to communicate with their teams, especially around something like stock based compensation, where people are people? They see their shares, they look at the price, they do the math. And stock based compensation can be a very big part of compensation for the technology sector. Is there anything you've done for your team or with your team that you've found to be extra effective at just level setting around this topic that you think other leaders could productively adopt?

[00:53:50] Tobi: Presumably, the leaders are going to be on the same side of the table as the rest of the team. So I think actually, just saying that is really, really good. It's like, "Hey, this sucks for everyone." There's three things that make us all use this tax based compensation in terms of long term alignment and so on. It's very hard to improve on as a facility, but it has this massive downside of everyone freezing the current level of ambient market optimism into a number that's really relevant for everyone after a certain point. We would never, ever design a system from scratch like this. It's a fairly dumb system. But the upsides are of course spectacular, because it really can swing both ways. But the downside is also obvious. We are thinking about how would you actually do compensation from scratch if you would design it today and see if you can get in that direction? Just because, if it weren't for the stock based compensation strike price setting, then there would not be a real relation between the stock price, outside of when people sell shares and buy shares when it matters. Or when a company wants to sell shares, then it matters. But I think there's a benefit of reducing the day to day impact of the stock price onto the company as much as possible. And I think we'll see more new and clever compensation systems again, that are going to try to just go for different sets of trade offs, try to reproduce some of the things that we got through stock based conversation and other means. I think that's worthwhile thinking about. Will not solve the immediate issue though. Outside of that, I don't have good advice. The best time to talk about these things was half a year ago. We were lucky to just tell everyone. When the stock was up 20%, we did not get 20% smarter. So if it goes down 40% tomorrow, we also didn't get 40% dumber. This is all philosophically points at a very particular spot that's very right. I think we might have even talked about this last time.

It's like the Alfred Adler idea of separation of tasks. And I find that's an incredibly applicable concept. Basically, in a nutshell is, what do you control? And then he talks you into actually, you don't control anything other than the content of your brain, really, which is a very stoic idea, but also clearly right. He talks a lot about interpersonal conflict. Someone says, "This person doesn't like me and I feel bad about myself because of that." He retorts that, your job is to be a likable person. And if that person doesn't like you, then they control that and that's nothing to do with you. It's how to live this. It's clearly correct. And frankly, it might just simply be the best idea in the world. At least a candidate for that. I really find that broadly applicable. What's my job? My job is fundamentally to fill my brain with a set of intuitions that are going to be really, really good in the moment for Shopify. Being able to make flexible decisions, being able to know enough and have enough depth about all the things that Shopify works on that I can at least counter check people's assumptions based on first principle thinking, that's important to me. The goal of the company is just, be the best company you can. Work on the fair market value. You're not the stock. The stock is a voting mechanism on how much we succeed over time, with all sorts of other confounding variables in it. To me, that's extraordinarily liberating to think about the world in this way. It guides me in all sorts of places. I want to be the best dad I can. The relationship for my children is an emergent fact based on that, how is this working? One of my sons is going to be one of those which really has to reach for independence, and everything dad is doing is uncool, which I'm sure I'm going to get into this phase soon. That is regrettable, but not something I'm going to try to micromanage away, because that's where things go really bad.

I find that really useful when thinking about stock. I find that really useful when talking about compensation. I think again, compensation specifically is the base salary, sure. It's a stock based compensation, which of course is a bummer to everyone there right now. But also, your lifetime earnings is the thing that you should optimize for. Forget your stock based compensation. Forget your salary. It's about the skills you acquire. Most people will listening will work in industries that are very meritocratic, or at least have very good performance management. Tech and finance and so on. And the world will conspire to get you to the place where you have the most marginal value. Otherwise, you should find another place to work for. The trick, if you want to make money is, learn the most, become better at your skills. It's hard to imagine something better to pick up and learn about than the behavior of companies in times of, the purse strings are a bit tighter and ambient optimism is a bit lower. I think people can rise to vocation. And I think companies will wind up being a lot more focused. More and more of their adjacencies are going to fall to the wayside because at the end of the day, we make goods and services that are usually delightful to our customers. And that's kind of the entire thing we're doing as companies. Figuring out how to be of as much value for that and be the person who has conviction or knows what to do next. Then other people are looking around to figure out, who is emerging as a leader? Those are the things that will have much bigger impact than these underwater grants that you might be fretting about. At least try to balance the attention units that you have in your brain between both of those parts of your compensation. And optimize, when you're part of a company, always for working at a place where you can grow the most and where you can learn the most. That's honestly the true key to lifetime earnings.

Future Direction & Blockchain's Potential
[00:59:03] Patrick: That's interesting how that fair market value concept can be zoomed down to the individual. And it boils down to learning, fueled by curiosity is a really cool concept. I would also sum up what you said about all of this as, capital markets at their best form for a company represent opportunity. They should not be fully relied upon. If you're in that game of full reliance on capital markets, you're subject to the whims of things you don't control. And unit profitability and being profitable through the journey and controlling that destiny is really critical and a really cool takeaway. If you think about now where this all goes from here, I love the Buffet quote. I almost never quote Buffet, but this is a particularly good one. "Every storm runs out of rain." I just think that's so true. This storm will run of rain too. And the other side of this is going to be, we know the trend lines. We've seen the e-commerce penetration trendline. We've seen the digital penetration trend lines, which are inexorable. Where does that take us? How much do you think COVID altered that trajectory? Obviously, for a period of time, it drastically inflected the adoption curves, and it seems like we're leveling off or even returning to the prior curves. How do you think about all of that and where we're going? This is kind of hearkening back to where we started, which is digital infrastructure as a concept. What's exciting to you, to close on an optimistic and forward looking note? What has your deepest interest or curiosity right now, as you navigate towards that horizon?

[01:00:26] Tobi: We've been trying to solve very complex technical problems for a long time. And the quality of solutions coming right now is just better than I think a lot of what we’ve seen in the past. And there's this other effect that we alluded to earlier, which is that, enough people are either at end of their careers now, and actually take the time to write books about what they learned. And I think we're such a young industry that we just didn't have that good source material, or at least things that we can immerse ourselves in the thoughts and lessons learned of some other individual. And then pick and choose the ones which we think will be relevant for the long term. You can do this in every space, and in tech you couldn't. There's just not that much important things written yet. And that's really changing, there's lots of lessons learned now and that's really good. And so COVID leaped forward. In terms of GDP numbers in terms of usage, these are these sort of vectors that we use to figure out which direction things are going. Things have jumped forward, like upwards and then meandered back to basically the trend line in every chart I've ever seen. I see some of them have a trend line, and it's not the trend line. People engage in a little bit of motivated reasoning with graphs at times, and things are tracking ahead. And that makes sense, because we now are living on a planet where I think everyone has a functioning understanding about how to communicate remotely, utilize the internet, involve it in their lives, with their families, with their companies, with their churches or whatever. That is going to lead to a different outcome. Innovation is very path dependent, and it'll be a very different world because of this. Maybe not in exactly the ways we thought. For some time we thought, maybe this is just a 10 year leap ahead, then there would be no convergence. There would just be a step function and then a dent in the chart. Maybe this is true in some places, it's not true universally.

Again, that's fine, because people consume whatever they want to consume. And the wonderful thing is, now, no one's forced to be inside anymore, under a shelter in place, no matter what you think about these kind of policies. So people have personal agency again, and we'll see what they do. But one thing we will not have to deal with anymore is ignorance about the digital realm. So that's a massive opportunity space again, and I'm super encouraged about cultural trends within engineering, because everything is getting a lot more pragmatic again. Things have gotten very theoretical, and people fell in love a little bit with the tools rather than the output of the tools, which can happen during good times. There's always a bit of a back to basics that happens when times get a little bit tougher. You will end up doing nothing after a while, if you don't get these times every once in a while, so that's encouraging. And it was already going on before it happened, but it accelerated, which is especially important because planet earth is going to be limited by the lack of engineers. We don't have enough for all the digital problems we have to solve.So engineering efficiency is going to be the second best thing there. Lots of advances in UX. I think the product discipline is sort of coming into its own and has stronger self confidence. No one's surprised by the unreasonable power of data either. So I think these four disciplines make the R&D realm, and the R&D realm is going to be the one which dictates innovation. I would say, it's as healthy as I've ever seen it as a discipline. And that's, I think really, really exciting, because it will lead to fantastic products that people will be extremely excited about, inside of companies like Shopify and others as well.

[01:03:44] Patrick: I realized that I have an opportunity to ask you about your interaction with this notion of block chains and ownership in the digital sense, at a time when it's a bit out of favor. We're talking on the 17th of May in 2022, and we've just been through some very prolific blowups with something like Luna. There's definitely a flush out, I'll call it that's happening, a forest fire of sorts that's happening in that world. But you said earlier, something really interesting, which is, people like to own stuff. And we don't have that hourglass choke point for pure ownership in the digital sense. What have you learned about this area that's interesting to you, especially as it seems like it's being tested right now? What intrigues you? What might this unlock? How should other people think about it? Because I know you've spent time on it.

[01:04:28] Tobi: I'm very excited about this. I'm not a fan of a lot of things that are going on, on it. I think you're right, the Luna thing is just nuts. You invoked the concept of a forest fire. Good forestry management involves actually letting fires go through, so that the fuel on the ground doesn't build up and make something that ends up being fully out of control. I was hoping something more measured would go through, but it was quite clear that something had to go through. My excitement about crypto is really from an enablement perspective. Again, the zero marginal cost copying of everything is the world we all live in. It's a totally intuitive, obvious concept to me, but everything can be infinitely copied. In fact, even using a website is actually copying images from a server into your main memory. Again, I think about things very much from an enablement and infrastructure perspective. And the blockchain and specifically smart contracts, which I think are even more meaningful than a blockchain are just really creating things that we couldn't do.

We were limited to building basically the things that could be built with abundance. So that was a really, really good first step. But you want the internet to be able to implement complex systems that involve ownership. Trust is a very human concept, and figuring out how to port trust is very, very tricky. And in fact, if you ever see the charts of trust in institutions, it's trending very much the wrong way. We may actually lose certain institutions over this decade from the ability to engage with citizens in a way where everyone's really fully trusting each other. Math is very good as a way to model trust. I think the internet has gotten some new skills, new comments, new infrastructure. We will be able to build very, very cool things with that. You see this in the arts right now, like NFTs. It's easy to level criticism there, but I've also had dinner with people who have very memorably dedicated entire lives to a particular, very nichey sub-part of art, wrote essays about it and so on, and it just ended up being one of those types of arts that just was really compatible with the ideas of NFTs and blockchains. The world went up and ended up capturing everyone's imagination and has one of the most many times traded 5% split amongst artists and initial publisher.

But if the only thing we end up here is an actual business model for the arts, there's a lot of people who think that humanity, being human, is actually defined by arts. I'm not sure I would take that position, but I think the fact that it's in the running means we actually should take it seriously. And this is the first time the arts have gotten a new business model since patronage. That's pretty notable. Usually when something has unlocked something new that's possible, it's not going to be useful for only just one single use case. Now that all being said, they've got to figure out how to get some of the frothiness out of this. More and more people are learning that some institutions are very good institutions and really ought to exist and ought to have some leverage, and how this all can be reconciled, I don't know. There's a small part that Shopify can play around, because we love the idea of communities. A lot of good Shopify stores end up striking up communities. NFTs are very good club membership attestation. So products that are available to people or potentially infinitely reorderable to people after their title is managed by something you have in a wallet is just a very cool way to think about bootstrapping new communities. So there's lots of things we can support there and support merchants with.

I have a lot of friends who make a good deal of money. Not everyone stayed in the arena. Me and some of my colleagues did. A lot of people made a good deal of money and followed the siren call of sipping mojitos on a beach, and I always thought this was really regrettable. I love when people build. Again, I love entrepreneurship. I think that comes through in these conversations. I see a lot of them come back, just because something that actually is probably not much right now, but it will unlock completely new potential in somewhat similar way how the '90s internet did. I think this is what a lot of us are reminded of, because the '90s internet, you went to a university to get your first terminal, Netscape web browser experience. There wasn't a useful website to go to. I remember the default at my local university was basically Yahoo. There was one website that's called The Big Red Button That Does Nothing, which you could push. So unfortunately I think a lot of crypto is like big red button that doesn't do a lot. That is not a statement about the future potential of the entire space, far from it. So this is what I personally like about it.

[01:08:44] Patrick: Well, since I've already had you on and asked my normal closing question, I thought I'd come up with a new one for this time. Is there an idea that you've encountered recently that you've fallen in love with, that's relatively new to you? It could be from a book. It could be from any source. You strike me as someone that collects interesting and useful ideas, tries them on for size, keeps some, jettisons other. What have you encountered that is something that you're playing with right now that's potentially interesting or useful, that's a new idea?

[01:09:14] Tobi: I do love digging into ideas and handling them. Obviously I spend a good deal of time trying to figure out my thoughts on infrastructure. We did talk at length about it, so I don't want to go more into it. But the return on investment of the Apollo program is probably like $5 trillion. It's just nuts how much. And I'm so sad that we’re not doing these things anymore, but I understand why, but I understand how to fix it. But like again, if we can at least keep doing it in the digital realm, then things are good. I mean, the thing I just find is culture. It's like we had a really cool thing going, which I'm missing now, where everyone works digitally. We really succeeded with company internal multiculturalism, where our Shopify Plus team was in a different office and had a cohesive culture which was fantastic for this kind of thing. Even the engineers that were part of Plus ended up staying late at the end of quarters, and they had a gong there, and they shipped at the end of quarter. No one at Shopify has ever considered doing this, we ship when something is done.

I guess what multiculturalism to me means is tolerance and appreciation of other cultures, but ability to maintain difference as well. Because I think if you end up meeting exactly in the middle, you have a very undifferentiated culture. Sometimes the spectrum of things that people are allowed to talk about gets very limited even in these environments. So we're trying to figure out how to do this in digital. That's something I'm figuring out. When you analyze really good companies. I think they have succeeded in being able to have different parts of a company work on different pace, different north stars, different pursuits, different culture, different norms, instead of driving towards a global cohesion level. And I think, to me, that's notable.

[01:10:50] Patrick: It's a wonderful thing. I mean, it feels like the whole world's trying to figure this out. Like, what is the right mix of separation, decentralization, in-person, digital? It's like there's no good answer to it, but everyone's yearning for something different than generic, all-digital, Zoom-filled days. And it's important to solve. Well, Tobi, this is, as always, just incredibly fun. So many interesting topics to cover. I think for me, the takeaway is this notion of working on something well defined, taking it very seriously, and understanding this principle of the horizon, that you should love the unexpected changes that come at you, because all that's doing is giving you more opportunity to learn, versus living a rigid rule system that becomes very difficult when there's chaos, like what we've seen in the last couple of years. So I really appreciate your time. I always learn so much from you. Thank you so much.

[01:11:38] Tobi: Yeah. Thanks for having me. This was great fun.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
