
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released February 17th, 2021
Founder's Field Guide
Carlos Brito - Creating an Ownership Culture
Carlos Brito is the CEO of Anheuser-Busch InBev. We cover AB InBev’s culture of ownership, how Carlos balances organic growth with acquisitions and managing disruption as an industry incumbent.

00:00:00
00:56:59
Introduction
Patrick: [00:02:41] My guest today is Carlos Brito, CEO of Anheuser-Busch InBev. AB InBev is the world's largest brewer of beer and maintains a portfolio of hundreds of beer brands across the globe. Our conversation focuses on AB InBev's culture of ownership, how Carlos balances organic growth with acquisitions, and how he and his team manage disruption as an industry incumbent. I loved hearing about Carlos' story from growing up in Brazil, to now running one of the largest businesses in the world. I hope you enjoy my conversation with Carlos Brito.

So Carlos, when I first heard your story it was at a charitable event that my wife helped put on called REACH Prep, here in Connecticut. And I was so interested in your personal story that while I don't normally start with someone's personal story, I think in this case I'd love to do so.

I'd love you to begin with just a thumbnail sketch of what got you here to this point in your career. I love the path that you've taken, the things that have mattered to you along the way. Introduce us to how you got here.

Carlos: [00:03:37] I'm originally from Brazil, from Rio de Janeiro, that's where I was born and where I spent a lot of my early years. I come from a middle-class family. My dad is a doctor, a medical doctor, a physician, and my mom stayed at home; typical, middle-class family.

And I went to engineering school. I went to a Jesuit school for 12 years. And then I went to a public university, the Federal University of Rio, and it was for free; it was paid like 500 bucks a year for an engineering course so I did mechanical engineering there. After that, I went to Germany and I worked for Mercedes-Benz, the car company, for a year and that opened up my eyes to the world.

Brazil in those days was a closed economy. The cost was very depreciated so it was impossible to travel to go anywhere, at least for a middle-class family, so we didn't know much about the world. It was the first time I got this scholarship, it was a job, I went there and I opened up my world. So when I came back, before I started doing something on a more permanent basis, I liked to still go study elsewhere.

When I came back from Brazil, I went to work for Shell Oil as an engineer. At Shell, it was the first time I heard the word MBA, the masters. And it was one of my friends there, two guys actually, that were applying for an MBA in the US. And I said, "You know what? That's something that could fit well, because I'd like to open my horizons to engineering a bit further."

So I started the whole process, I didn't have the money to do it from my family so I had to go for a scholarship and in Brazil those days there were no scholarships, no loans, nothing, very high interest rates and all that. So I got a scholarship from the Rotary association, Rotary International, to go to Wharton or UCLA. One of the two. And I was accepted by both, so I was all set to go to one of these two schools.

But then the very last minute, one of my friends from the Jesuit school he had gone a year before to the Stanford Business School. And he would call me and send letters from there and said, "Brito, you have to come here you apply, you have come here." I said, "No, my scholarship doesn't cover Stanford." But because he insisted so much, I applied. And I applied to Harvard as well, so four schools I applied.

Harvard did not accept me, and Stanford did the very last minute. So I said, "Man, I'd like to go to Stanford because this friend of mine tells me it's great." In those days in the business school rankings, US news or reports, whatever, it was number one, I think. And it would only take a Brazilian one representative per year.

So I decided to go, I tried to trigger my scholarship, Rotary said too late it doesn't work. And then I said, "Man, I have to monetize this somehow." I had to get somebody to sponsor me. I knew through a friend of a friend of a friend there was this banker in Rio that had a boutique investment bank, Jorge Paulo Lemann, and he would finance employees of his at the bank. He would extend a loan to employees of the bank to go pursue an MBA in the US.

I was not an employee of the bank, but I decided to try to approach him and tell him my story. So long story short, I did. We had an interview, I was very nervous. For one hour, he dedicated time to my story. And he said, "You're working for Shell, Shell's a client of the bank. Let me get some news about your career there and stuff, some info, and I'll call you back in a week." And sure enough he called me back. He said, "Hey, I got some information. The bank cannot help you, but I'm going to help you myself."

I didn't get a scholarship for the first year. I was shaking on the phone I said, "Well, Jorge, I'm not going to be able to pay you back." He said, "No, man, it's a scholarship, no need to pay me back." So the second year you have to figure out how to do it. And he said, "But I want three things in return." I said, "Okay, what are the three things?"

He said, "The first is that you keep me updated, informed." In those days, no email, nothing and I wrote a letter for him every month for two years and he never wrote back but he would call back every time. Every month I would send a letter report, "I'm taking this class. I'm doing this. I saw this article," Xerox copy, attached. And he would call me back, we'd talk for two or three minutes; same thing next month and so on.

Second thing he said is that he said, "I'd like you to help people, like I'm helping you, in the future if you can," and I do. So right after business school, I came back and started helping people pursue dreams like my own. And the third thing he said is that, "You don't have any obligation to come work for me after the MBA class is finished, but come talk to me before you select the full-time job." And I did that.

But where it really made a difference is that on the day I went to the bank, he signed everything. And again, when I was about to leave he said the one thing that changed my life, he said, "Have you ever been in an investment bank before?" And I said, "No. I'm an engineer. I've been to Mercedes-Benz in Germany, Shell Oil in Brazil." He said, "When you're going to Stanford," he said in two weeks time, he said, "Why don't you come here for two weeks to get to know our people and our culture." I didn't even know at the time what the meaning of culture was, but I said okay.

And that made the whole difference because when I was there for two weeks, going from area to area, it was a small boutique bank. And I compared it on the two companies that I worked for, that place was small. Everybody was brilliant and fast pacing, decisions were being made, calls and this and that. And I said, "Man, I'd love to be part of this group one day." And that stuck with me.

And at times at business school, my college I participated in different interviews, cycles and all that; I had seven job offers, but the only people I spoke in Brazil was with Jorge, that was the only guy in Brazil I spoke to. All the other offers were in letterhead paper all formal, "This is your salary. Your training, you're going to be doing. Your title is going to be doing this," in the US and Germany.

And from Brazil, I interviewed with him and his partners, he called me one day and said, "Hey Brito, we like you very much, why don't you come work for us." I said, "Okay. But what am I going to do?" And he said, "Oh, I don't know. I mean, you've got two weeks here. You know the people, you come you see what you like, you settle, you do it." That's it. I said, "Okay." And I'm looking at all these offers and formal offers and paper and all that, and I had to make a decision because the timeline was going fast.

And I said, "I wanted to ask you about compensation, but I didn't have the courage," because the guy did so much for me. And I was embarrassed to ask, but at some point I had to. So every time the conversation was going to the end, I would come up with different things just to recover and see if she would talk about compensation, he wouldn't.

So at some point I said, "Jorge, I know it's not important but I need to ask you this. What about..." took a deep breath, "But what about compensation?" He said, "Compensation is salary, bonus," and that kind of thing. And he said, "Oh, it's $20,000 per year," that's 30 plus years ago, and the offers I had in front of me were between 80 and 100.

Okay. And he said, well, 20. And I said, "Oh, 20. Okay. 20." And said, "Everything else is variable. But this is the fixed for you to pay rent, gas bills and everything." I said, "20." And that fella saw that I was a bit surprised by that he said, "Jorge, because he has to move from the US back to Brazil, let's give for the first year another five to pay for the move." I said, "Okay." So 25 for the first year then goes back to 20 I said, "Okay, I'll take it." Then I hang up I said, "Oh my God, 25. I have 100 in front of me, 80 in front of me, 90 in front of me."

I spoke to my dad, never told him the difference in salary but just saying I was going back to Brazil in those days when Brazil was going through a crisis, he said, "You're crazy. You're out of your mind," and then made all the difference. That's where I met my wife, by the way. She used to work for the bank, so when I got back and started working for the bank that's how we met. And we're still married 10 years later, so four kids. So that's great.

Culture
Patrick: [00:11:02] I absolutely love the starting story and the hard choice to make, just to get into that culture. Culture, is I think a big part of our discussion today. Obviously, the entire ecosystem around you is famous for its culture. You described that a little bit with a few adjectives there, what it felt like for that two week period, but I'd love you to talk about what you've learned about culture building as you've moved through your career and the distinct form of culture that you and your partners bring to bear at AB InBev.

Carlos: [00:11:30] What I learned from my senior partners from day one is that companies are formed by people, so I just think that people forget about it. So in a lot of places you hear people say, "What are they going to do? What's the company going to do in this kind of situation we're facing?"

And people forget the company is really a group of people that have a consuming minds, somebody who's going to pay for your service and products at the end of the day; that's why you exist because you solve their problems somehow, and a group of people that have some basic values that are important for them, relevant to them, and they work together as a group because they believe in the same values and they're excited about the consumer mission and they're consumer centric and all that.

So we learned from day one that the only sustainable competitive advantage any company could have was really the quality of the talent and the engagement of its people, that's it, everything else is accessory and everything else is a product of these people and the values they have and the values that we call culture.

So in our company, for example, we've always had what we call the 10 principles in our website. And in short, it's about dream, people and culture. So we say, life's too short for you to waste time with small things. Let's think big. Let's have a purpose in what we're doing. Let's do something that can be transformation, impactful, I can look back years from now and be proud that we're part of that group that did something meaningful. So think big, is the first one.


 

Source: AB InBev

For you to think big and have big dreams, you need great people because only great people can take something that's a dream, an idea, and get it and realize it, put it in practice. So this idea of invest time so you can attract the very best. And more important than a trap, you can retain them because it creates an environment where things that are important for them are there so they can stay here for the long-term. And that connects to the third piece, which is the culture summarize, which we call ownership.

So this idea that the owners make better decisions because it's their money, their company, as compared to executives and professionals. Owners join companies to get that dream and make it real, and professionals join companies to stay for three years to build their resume not to build the company and its mission. So from day one we said, "Okay. What's important are the people we can attract, retain, develop, deploy, and the value set, the culture, that they all share." Because especially as the company grows, you cannot have oversight of all the operations around the world.

If that company has amazing products that consumers love, it's because the people of that company understand where customers are going, what they need to make their lives better and you get that insight and you transform that into a product or a service. If you're able to be very efficient, it's because the people that manage that process have operational access in mind as a value and they want to pursue that because they think that wasting resources is a bad idea.

We have no planet B, we only have this planet we live in. And if you can be efficient, why be inefficient? But some people don't think about that, they just think about, "Okay, let's get this done no matter how we do it." And some of the people will say, "No, let's get this done with the best quality in the most efficient way we can, so we don't waste precious resources and we minimize the impact we have in the communities where operate."

Ownership
Patrick: [00:14:51] What have you learned about maintaining the ownership part of the culture, as a company gets as big as yours is? I understand the ability to do so in the early stages of a business with an early partnership and everyone's truly an owner in size, what have you learned about keeping that concept alive as a business has many divisions? It's global, it's everywhere, how do you maintain the ownership culture?

Carlos: [00:15:16] That's a very good point, because we have 170,000 people around the world in all continents. But what we learned from day one is that, what makes you an owner is not shares or equity or options that you get. Actually, only 1% of our people have equity participation in a company we give as incentives, I'd like to think that 100% are owners.

And things are not perfect. There are people that don't feel like that, as time goes by you hear they become an owner or they're not going to fit somehow. But ownership is this idea, it's this mindset you have that's, "This is our business. This is our company. I want to be proud of what I'm doing here."

And you give people freedom to own the business that they're responsible, in charge of. That gives people that ownership mindset because they empowered to take decisions, to make decisions, to take risks and to manage that business as their own business with accountability of course, with rules of course, but with also freedom to operate within a framework.

And you may never think you would do, to get people that idea that this is our stuff. If somebody is not an owner you can give them equity or anything, that person will remain a non-owner. If the person is an owner, as the person progresses in the company at some point you give them equity, that reinforces an existing ownership mindset but it doesn't create that mindset. So this is something that we have very present in our mind.

Patrick: [00:16:40] I absolutely love the flipping of that order. You would think that getting shares makes you an owner, but I love that it reinforces it. So fascinating. The other key thing you said there, and it's obviously it's tied to the ownership mindset, is this concept of wasted resources. People will be familiar probably with zero-based budgeting, the idea of constantly assessing how you're allocating capital, how you're spending the company's money, this is a very unique aspect of you and your partner's business. Can you walk me through the how and the why of avoiding wasting resources?

Carlos: [00:17:11] This is hand in glove with the ownership mindset. Think about this, when we deal with all the money that is hard to earn. We all know that it's hard to earn money, so when we deal with our money in our household when we travel with our families, we always look at the cost benefit of things, right? We say, "Okay, should I go everyday for a five-star seven course meal with my family or should I do this every now and then but not every day? Should I stay in a five-star hotel? Should I fly first class?" We do things if you can afford comfortably, but you always try to have that common sense of judging things.

If the company is yours and you're an owner, you do the same thing at the company. The problem is that a lot of people have a dual life, they have a life when they get home and they are efficient with their resources because it's their money but when they come to the company to work to the office, the company is rich, the company is big.

What difference it makes if I turn off the light? What difference it makes if I do this a bit better, if I don't travel first class I travel business or I travel economy for a 2-hour trip? For the company it doesn't make any difference. Well, it does because if everybody thinks like this, the moment you give people that ownership mindset you start doing at the office what you do at home and then efficiency comes naturally.

The same way you turn off the lights when you exit your bedroom at home, we expect people to turn off the lights when you leave the room, that's what you do at home. So we're not asking anything that's outside of his world, anything that's tortured, no, we're just asking people to use common sense and that comes with ownership. The moment you understand that this is our company, you do what you do at home and then efficiency comes naturally.

Patrick: [00:18:49] Are there tactics or strategies that help reinforce that behavior or show people why that way of operating is not just better, but also frees up resources for growth elsewhere?

Carlos: [00:18:59] You answered it. The moment you tell people, "Guys, we have to go where consumers are going." The more efficient we are with things that consumers don't value, are not buying, will not buy more off, will not pay a premium for, and put money behind things they value. And that's the distinction we make between non-working dollars and working dollars.

Non-working dollars is everything you spend in the company and you need some of those expenses that consumers don't care, are not willing to pay a premium for. Working dollars are everything that supports what you're doing that consumers value.

So for example, if you're in a very luxurious office, this is something that will drag your resources that consumers don't care because when they buy a product off the shelf, they don't care if your office is here, there, anywhere. So you're spending money that you could be putting towards sports that they love, music that they love, arts that they love, broadcasting things, streaming things for them and you're wasting in your luxurious office.

Does that mean we have bad offices? No, that's totally the opposite. We're a people that value how tough it is to make money so when we spend, just like in our household, we spend with care. So our offices are always very comfortable, it's very well located, but are they over the top? No. Why? Because we don't believe it's necessary.

I remember when I was interviewing people many years ago when we came to New York. I remember I got a guy that read in our website that we're very efficient and cost cautious. And the guy came to the interview and said, "Oh yeah, I understand that, because the company I'm in these days that's New Jersey and our office is terrible and all the rugs are all tearing apart. We have a river, that's not the best, in our backyard and all that."

I said, "No, no, no, you're wrong, we're not cheap, we're frugal, it's very different. Our people here, look at our offices here. Everything you just described has nothing to do with the way our offices are set up." He said, "Yeah, you're right, it's very nice." I said, "Yes, because we like people to come here and stay for the long-term, so we treat our people well." Like we do at home, we try to have a home that's not any castle but it's something comfortable, but we're not cheap by any means. But we're also not going to throw money through the window, not now.

Patrick: [00:21:18] I love the concept of frugal but not cheap. And it also makes me wonder as the business has progressed and so many different brands have come together, I want to talk about brands in a few minutes, but first just to understand what you've learned again about when some new team is coming into the fold how to effectively spread the culture that you've worked so hard to cultivate to these new parts of the team.

Carlos: [00:21:40] When you look at our company the last three years, we grew organically but also inorganically through M&A and different business combinations as we called it and other companies coming together. And the question always comes; well, are you going to acquire this company that has 60,000 people, 30,000 people, they come from different culture, different background, how are you going to make this thing work?

What we noticed, at least so far, lucky us, is that different than us that think that culture is very important, they have this on the wall, on the website; we talk about it every time, every opportunity, most companies don't do that. And the companies that have integrated, they had something that was in our culture that was there but was never formalized. Well, they had a culture that was dependent on one person, the CEO or the founder, not our case, and the moment that person left because the company was acquired, there was a vacuum.

And then we came with our principals and said, "Hey, let's adopt this. We're going to learn from each other best practice in this whole thing, for sure, and the best practice will win over the other ones. But in terms of principles, these are our principles; the big dream, the best people, ownership. Okay. Let's use that."

In our company, the culture is not my culture, it's everybody's culture. We designed it from day one because we didn't want to have a dependency on one person or two or three, we said, "No, no, it has to be everywhere in the company to be truly a one company, one culture." And the distinction we make here is that, as we operate this we do around the world in all continents, you have to hear clear about local culture and company culture.

Local cultures are diverse, they're different, that's why we travel. We travel because when you go to Korea, to China, to India, to Brazil, to Germany, to Canada, people eat differently, they spend their free time in a different way, they dress differently, they have different stories or histories. That's what attracts us. That's why we travel, to see different things. We don't want to change that.

But when you join us, in any of these countries, you have to subscribe to our values that luckily are common sense values. I've never met anybody who said these things don't make sense; a big dream, best people, ownership. We found that as we went to more and more countries, we have the question, "Will this culture travel well? Will people in different local cultures accept our company culture?" And what we saw is that yes, because what we are proposing is what most athletes that are successful and students that are successful do.

Students that are successful and athletes, what did they do? They have a big dream, they want to go to the best college. They have a best mentor for their PhDs. So they have a big dream. They know that to get there they have to be great, but they have to surround themselves with great people because nobody gets there by themselves. And you have to own you're going to be forced to do anything.

Athletes that go to Olympics, if they want to go to the Olympics, they train 363 days a year; they take two days off birthday and whatever Christmas or something else, but they train five hours a day. But not because you're forced to do it, is because you have that big dream you want to achieve it and you own the process. You're doing it because you chose to and you chose to sacrifice other things, since you can have it all. Today it came to that one thing that you're single-minded focused on, but this is very important.

So that's why in any business combination between signing the deal and closing the deal, in our experience, there's always six months to nine months because of all the different jurisdictions; you need to get it approved because there are multi-country deals, we use it very intensely. There are rules for what you can share or not, this two companies are in between the signing and closing. But we go visit. We travel. We meet the people. We identify who the key people are. We talk about our culture, our values. We answer questions because when the signing comes, we want to be one company, one corporate culture.

Brand Strategy
Patrick: [00:25:26] One of the things that's happening alongside these cultural integrations is the management of an ever larger portfolio of brands. And brands, certainly under this umbrella, are distinct things. They have rich histories, imagery. They connote certain things with the consumer and they're different. As opposed to the culture which you want to be very aligned, brands have their own unique feel. What have you learned about managing such a large portfolio of distinct brands? What is a well-managed brand mean?

Carlos: [00:25:55] First of all, a well-managed brand is a brand that's consistent in it's position, so can I be changing every year? What it means in consumers minds? So it has to own a part of my brain, because it's connected to a niche. It's connected to sophistication. It's connected to meals. It's connected to sports. It's connected to in-home occasions. And so it has to be consistent.

Second, that consistency and that positioning has to be grounded on consumer insights, something that's relevant to consumers and that we can deliver on a consistent basis. And that has to be executed with guard rails, so you can seem to reinforce that positioning with everything to do; the packaging, the experience, the event, the trademark activities you have when you go to shop at a grocery store, all these things have to reinforce that position in consumers mind.

So this whole idea that consumer insights what's comes first if you understand consumers, it's positioned the brand on something that's relevant territory for them and you execute that brand with consistency, with guard rails, given the position you have in consumer's mind.

The other thing you learn Patrick is that, consumers around the world are more similar than different. So when you talk about their needs and what they're trying to achieve in life with one or two exceptions here and there, their ranking of needs and what they're trying to achieve is very similar. Very similar. No matter what they drink, what they wear, what religion they have, very similar. So that also makes it easier.

That's why you have global brands. More and more, in any business, you have brands that are global in nature. So they appeal to different consumers around the world because they tap into a need that a consumer has or a pain point consumers' trying to solve in their lives, and you tap into that need and that's a global need. So yes, you have global brands, but you also have local brands that have their roots and heritage in that one market. This combination of global, regional, and local, is what makes a portfolio perform.


 

Patrick: [00:27:57] What are the largest brand management or brand mistakes that you've seen, whether in your portfolio or outside?

Carlos: [00:28:05] We've been in the business of 600 years, since our brewery in Belgium started in 1366.

Patrick: [00:28:11] Incredible.

Carlos: [00:28:12] So that's more than 600 years ago. And one myth that we saw that we learned from time and again, is that brands have a lifecycle and at some point they'll disappear and we believe that's a myth. What you have is that brands that lose touch with consumers, brands that are not consistent or don't have a sound position, a simple thing that consumers can understand, they are poorly managed and that's why they disappear.

On the other hand, brands can grow or can shrink and that's why you have a portfolio. And sometimes brands will shrink and then to grow again 20 years later, because consumers are interested in the history, there's a throwback-type consumer mindset and all of a sudden consumers are valuing what was bigger 20 years ago, 30 years ago and then it comes back. We've seen that time and again, in all sorts of industries.

So that's why it's good to have a portfolio of brands because brands should not die but if they are poorly managed, they could die. But in a portfolio, you have to accept that some brands sometimes in growth mode, sometimes they're stable, sometimes they'll shrink until they find any stability.

But the fact that they are there and they have a role to play in that portfolio, as consumers change and generations that are new come to consumer products, that thing can become relevant again and it'll grow again. But if that thing disappears, then you're going to be at a loss because when that thing comes up again, in terms of trend, you won't have that player in your portfolio to play that trend.

Change and Opportunity
Patrick: [00:29:38] I love Jeff Bezos' idea that you want to bet on things that won't change. And I love the 600 year old history, pretty confident in 100 people are going to like to drink beer and beverages. But even in something that is a low rate of change like your business, there are still always smaller changes that happens, threats that come.

And there's two specific in the beer business that I'd love to hear how you personally and the company navigated or thought about navigating through. The first is that rise of craft brewing. And the second is the rise of seltzer, more recently, which you've worked on pretty aggressively. Maybe we'll start with craft brewing. What was it like to live through that interesting and exciting change to the global beer market and how did you think about it as a company?

Carlos: [00:30:19] It's exciting, because again, if you start for the consumer, as they should always start. Again, in our company, the mantra is, "You go where consumers go because that's where growth is". So the craft movement started. We as a company, we do have a craft portfolio because the portfolio we inherited in the US and other countries that were new to us, they didn't have a portfolio craft.

But in the US as consumers or some customers started migrating to that segment, that was an emerging segment, we started investing that segment. And today, not only do we grow way ahead of the craft segment, but we are one of the top players in the craft industry. And that's because we realized that instead of fighting with that trend; as people say, you should make trends your friend, we decided to invest behind it. And we took advantage of something that was growing the category, that was appealing to new consumers that were not necessarily in the category, so they joined the category. It was very profitable and it was growing, so it's beautiful for the category.

The same thing with seltzer. Seltzer is the development that is different than beer but has some beer cues, but has some other things that are different. And because it's a slightly different mix in what it offers, it attracted people from other beverages into beer and beer like products like seltzer. And that brought more people to the category, premium product, premium price point, great margins and growing segment. So again, it sold this idea about, you have to observe where consumers are going because that's where growth is.

Patrick: [00:31:47] So really, the key to having the right mindset around change and making change an opportunity and not a threat, is just the empathy for the consumer or understanding where the consumer is.

Carlos: [00:31:56] One of the things we've talked a lot about here in our companies is, I give the incumbent and the insurgent. We've built our companies a bunch of insurgents. When we started three years ago we were not market leaders in our markets, but then we became market leaders and we became big.

So one thing you have to fight every day in a company that's large and global is that people don't feel entitled to the business we have today, but we should because it's true that we have to earn and re-earn it every day because consumers have choices. And this idea of change is one of those ideas.

If you behave as an incumbent, you believe that change means risk, threats. If you're an insurgent, you believe that change means opportunity because this is a new technology or a new consumer trend or a new habit that's forming that you if you embrace it, you can ride with it as opposed to a guessing. So this idea of embrace change, take measured risks, learn from it and continue to iterate, easier said than done, but this is the right way to look at change.

If you behave as an incumbent, you believe that change means risk, threats. If you're an insurgent, you believe that change means opportunity because this is a new technology or a new consumer trend or a new habit that's forming that you if you embrace it, you can ride with it as opposed to a guessing. So this idea of embrace change, take measured risks, learn from it and continue to iterate, easier said than done, but this is the right way to look at change.

Patrick: [00:32:56] One of the things we haven't talked about that's happening behind the scenes, is an incredible network of activity to get consumers the product that they love. We've talked about brands. As far as the consumer knows, they go to the store order it, they get it, they consume it. But to make that happen is an incredible coordination exercise in production and distribution and I'd love to hear what you've learned in those areas. And obviously, it's a scaled up business, I think you're the largest buyer of rice in the world. What have you learned about the production and distribution side of the business that helps you fulfill this big dream?

Carlos: [00:33:28] It's interesting you asked that because our business is a global business when you look at it, but it's a local business in its essence and its DNA. 95 plus percent of what we sell, we produce and sell locally.

So we get the water from the community. We get the farming products from the farmers, local farmers. We brew the beer in the community. We hire our people from the community, and we sell back to consumers in the very communities.

In a way, we're very tied to how well that community is doing. So if the community is doing well economically and thriving, growing, creating jobs, we tend to do well. If the community is doing well in terms of the environment and the environment the same as balanced and there's water, there's good farming, high quality farming, we tend to do well.

Sustainability. We always say sustainability is not part of our business, it's not an add-on that we look from time to time. You know our business sustainability, is our business. They're simple; no water, no beer. That's simple. Very simple; no farming, no beer.

I don't have wheat to brew, so because of that our four pillars of sustainability are totally connected to our business. They are water, farming, packaging, and energy. These are all the things that we have to do every day and we've done it for 600 years, otherwise there's no beer. But the way to do it in an efficient way, then it talks to sustainability.

So today sustainability made it cool to be efficient and to have less of an impact in the world around you because people value that, people understood that there's no planet B. We only have this planet and resources are finite. We've always tried to use less water because that makes business sense and it's good for the community, because we have to share the water with the community.

We try to have the highest quality and most efficient farming. And we have rich source from 30,000 farmers around the world. And we help them with better seeds, better technique, information about the weather, information when to plant, when to harvest, when to seed, when to do all those things so we can have more quality and more efficiency in the way farming is being managed.

Packaging. More than half of our products are sold in returnable packages, packages that will come and go. Consumers who will use that bottle, the bottle will return, we'll wash it, fill it again, send it back to the market. And the ones that are one way, that people will dispose off after using, we want most of it to be of recycled content: aluminum cans, the returnable bottles or glass bottles, kegs for draft beer.

Patrick: [00:36:01] I love the local aspect of it, which raises the question of how you assess and go after new markets. I'm sure a lot of this is done already, it's a very global brand, probably at most places in the world. But as you have been progressing through your career and the company has gotten bigger and bigger, what have you learned about the art and science of deciding, is it time now to try to go into Africa or into some other part of the world? What are the key things about assessing a new market and then rolling out a strategy to expand into that market?

Carlos: [00:36:31] I think what's key for us is always this idea of, "Okay. The market's here today, what is it going to be 10 years, 20, 50 years, 100 years from now?" And that's how you start expanding. You have the map of where the industry is today. Based on demographics or the trends, you try to map where the demand will come in years to come and then you put it against your footprint today and you check where the gaps are. And either you start developing that organically or you try to acquire a player that's active in those regions, but it's all based on that. Where's the industry today? What's going to be in 100 years from now? What are the gaps? And what are the gaps we need to fill organically, inorganically?

Patrick: [00:37:12] How much role does data play in the way that you think about allocating capital in the business? Now that you have all these brands, all these different parts of the world, knowing where to invest the company's time and resources probably is a major part of what you think about. How much of that is qualitative, quantitative? Walk me through that decision process.

Carlos: [00:37:31] You're right. The capital allocation these days, especially with the world we live today with, change is ever more present than faster. It's a very interesting exercise because think about this, you have a business to support the way it's defined today. So the way the business is defined today, you need support in terms of OPEX, in terms of CapEx. But you have emerging segments, things you need to start investing behind because that's where the trends and consumers are going. And I'll give you an example.

Five years ago, we founded a venture arm within our company called ZX Ventures. And we started investing in things that were small five years ago that our big company or big machine, as we call it, would not be prioritizing five years ago, but we know those things could be big given what was happening in other categories not because we were very smart. We looked at what other categories said. "This category is already there, our category is not there yet but of course we'll get there at some point, let's start investing"; five years ago.

So everything that has to do with craft on a global basis, not only in the US, with eCommerce, with direct consumer delivery, last-mile solutions. During COVID, during the pandemic, because of all the lockdowns, all the restrictions that our retailers had, our consumers had, all those platforms went through the roof. So our B2B and B2C platforms grew in one year, what we projected they would grow in three years.

And luckily, we were there because we were investing five years on that. And luckily we had platforms that could be scaled up quickly, because they had good technology behind them. And we had an amazing group of people of owners that are resilient, committed, engaged, and passionate about what we do; which is serve our retailers and serve our consumer so they have better lives.

So during the pandemic we had to use; for example, in a lot of Latin American countries, we used or quickly transformed some of our platforms to be marketplaces for consumers and retailers that were in lockdown periods. So retailers had to survive, but couldn't open, but they could do delivery. Consumers on lockdown needed staples, not only our products, products in general.

We put our technology to serve consumers, because we believe, Patrick, that businesses exists only because society allows them to exist. So COVID gave us an opportunity to once again, to show that we're part of the solution to issues that the community is facing. So when the community needed an app, it was there.

We had the water emergency program that we have on a global basis triggered. We used our plastic injection molds to do face masks. We used our trucks that were idle because waters went down, because bars were closed, restaurants, traveling, corridors, they were all closed, to help the governments get staples where they needed to.

We were helping hospitals to make makeshift hospitals, in six countries we did that. So I mean, we proved once again that companies like ours can be part of the solution like we've always been, that something that COVID really accelerated those platforms. And also, the very role of companies in collaborating with communities to solve common problems.

Patrick: [00:40:34] I love the concept of pivoting the company's resources and the local focus. One of the things that we haven't talked about yet is; just like you're the largest buyer of rice, you're probably also one of the largest marketing organizations in the world.

You mentioned earlier this really interesting idea of, each brand having to own its own positioning in somebody's mind. What have you learned about marketing generally speaking, especially how that has changed across your career as the world has gone digital?

A brand like Bud Light, I think one in five beers consumed is a Bud Light something crazy for an iconic brand like that but also for the long tail of the portfolio. What have you learned about the evolving nature of marketing?

Carlos: [00:41:11] What's very clear today are two things. First, the way you touch consumers in terms of marketing and messaging is very fragmented more than ever. So in the old days was the 30 second commercial in primetime TV, Superbowl and these things.

Today, this things are still important but they're not the only game in town. You have tons of ways to get in touch with consumers and not interrupt their lives but talk to them, interact with them. So that's one thing that changed.

The other thing that changed is that consumers today they think highly of brands that are connected to a purpose not just brand that have glitzy marketing campaigns that can even be bad for the brand, it can be seen as empty. If you have a purpose, if you have something that your brand is connected to, that is something that really elevates them. And I'll give you an example, Stella Artois. We have a partnership now for six years or more with Water.org, one of the co-founders being Matt Damon.

In Water.org, the idea they had is that in countries, in Africa or Asia, where some parts of the population don't have access to water because they're not connected to the grid; normally, the women in that family would spend eight hours a day in search of water. So Water.org and Stella Artois got together to give that time back to those women, so they could do something productive so their families could have a better life.

And what we do is, the micro loans to those families at subsidized rates so they can get connection to the grid. And believe it or not, after many, many campaigns of Stella Artois throughout its history, a campaign that was the most successful was the one that connected Stella Artois to the Water.org's purpose, which is to bring water to families that have no access. And it was very simple. It was, you buy this chalice we give a family five years of access to water.

A lot of consumers sometimes they want to do some things to help others, but they don't know how to start. And when they see a brand they trust and sometimes they say, "I'm going to give money to this entity and it's all going to be lost in their bureaucracy. They have such a big overhead, big offices and stuff." One cent of every dollar of mine, will get to the final recipient, to the one I'm trying to help.

Stella Artois said, "You trust me. I've been with you forever." And Water.org, Matt Damon and here is his face, he's saying he's dedicating part of his life to this. You buy a chalice or you buy a six-pack of Stella, this money will go 100% to this family and this has been very successful.

And what was amazing is that Matt Damon and Mr. White, the two co-founders, came to us and said, "You know what? We've been on the road for a long time. We had no idea what a brand could do to our costs." The moment that we were just talking about water, about families in places nobody knows off sometimes or families that people they're not your friends, they don't leave behind you, it's kind of hard for you to understand their suffering.

But the moment you connect that to a brand that people trust and you brought that and said, "Hey, you want to help people on the other side of the world, you buy my six-pack and this money will go to that family or part of that money and I'm here to guarantee that money will get there." That made the rate of adoption of their costs goes through the roof because of a trusted brand. So brands are very powerful, they can get consumers to pay attention and engage.

Meritocracy and Feedback
Patrick: [00:44:32] To do any of this, coming back to people again, it's obvious that you need incredible operators that are carefully aligned. What have you learned about implementing, I'm guessing, the meritocracy required to keep the right people there, we didn't go too much into it earlier, and moving on the right trajectory? My understanding is that in some cases the people that have tons of responsibility are very young inside the company, say a bit about meritocracy and what that means.

Carlos: [00:44:59] That's one of the hallmarks of our company is that; at the young age, if you're talented, you get the positions that in other companies would take years to get. Because in other companies, if you went to 10 years ago you're going to be ahead of somebody who went in five years ago. So the older generations, the more senior generations of the company, they'll always be ahead of the more junior generations.

Here, no, the more talented people would be ahead of other people, no matter what generation or which year they joined the company and that's something that's very important for talented people, meritocracy. Your value go up by the year or the time with the company, you're measured by your potential, what you've done, by the teams you've built and by the culture you embrace and you're an ambassador, that's what you're measured on. And if you hit on all those cylinders, you're going to progress very fast because you don't have to respect seniority necessarily to progress.

What we learn, Patrick, is that great people like a couple of things. First, they like to work at a place where they respect the values and the purpose. The other things they like are meritocracy, we just spoke about, they like informality; not the way... We're working in jeans. We're working open layouts. Anybody has access to me, can walk to my desk, and that's informality. And the other thing people like is candor.

So informality is this idea that you can ask questions, you can challenge all these in an open fashion, no hidden agenda. And candor is this idea that you want to have feedback, you want to have mentors that will give you feedback because life's too short. You don't want people that just say you're great, you want people that say, "Hey, this and this and this, You're great. But let me tell you areas of opportunities or gaps you have. Let's work together so you become even better and you progressive even faster and you evolve as a human being even faster."

Feedback, the power of feedback. Honest, constructive, respectful feedback is something that's very much part of our culture. And whenever I go to colleges, because we do that a lot. 90% of people we hire is direct from college, so whenever I go there to talk about our business, our principals, I talk more than how we do things and what we do that is important. I want people to self-select.

People always ask, "Okay. What was important to your career?" And I always say, other than the obvious sayings, doing something I love, being in the right place, working hard and all that, luck as well; but I also say, the power of feedback. I was lucky that I always had bosses that were truly interested in my success and because of that, they were willing to tell me what I needed to hear not what I wanted to hear; in a respectful, constructive way, but tough when they had to be tough.

And I had many tough feedbacks and I still have feedbacks today, after 30 years in the company, that are tough because we're never there. The requirements are always changing, the bar is always being raised, so what was good yesterday is not good anymore. You have to adapt. You have to relaunch, to reinvent yourself. If people don't tell you that, it's going to take too long for you to conclude and life's too short for you to waste all this time. So, the power feedback.

Patrick: [00:47:59] What's an example something that you needed to hear, feedback that you got?

Carlos: [00:48:03] That I was not a very good active listener. That I would listen, but not really. Years ago, when I saw something I thought I had the solution or the action plan to do it, I would just do it when I was more junior. And as you become more senior and the things you have to do are bigger, the gaps are bigger and the challenges are bigger, you need a team to do it you can't do it by yourself. And if you have a team you learn, at least I learned, through the years that it's worth to spend the time to bring the team with you also because you might not have the best solution. Quite frankly, normally, you don't have the best solution.

In interacting with the team and listening in an active way, you will get to a better place in terms of plans than just going with your own idea; it's always the case 99% of the times. But in order to do that, usually, you need to take your time to listen. You need to take the time to inspire people, to unite people, so they all co-own the idea of ownership as opposed to being told what to do about understanding why that's necessary or the best way to go, to proceed. It was that one time that I had to hear, that I had to hear that many years, many, many years, and I still hear that from time to time.

Patrick: [00:49:16] You talked earlier about inorganic growth and then organic growth for a long time, I think early in your career, a lot of it was organic. And then you've been a part of some just enormous iconic acquisitions and M&A activity, to create the company that exists today. What advice would you give other business leaders for learning how to decide whether to focus on organic versus inorganic growth, maybe with a special emphasis on M&A?

Carlos: [00:49:42] What I learned time and again, is that life is all about and not about or. So it's not about organic growth or inorganic growth. In most business, it's going to be a combination. Like anything in life, if it was only or life would be easier. No, it's this and that. 99% of the people or more are focused on the organic side of the business, but some people are focused on opportunities that might show up.

And when they show up, we're the first to ask ourselves always the same questions; do we have the people to reintegrate these businesses? Are they willing to go places, because this is another countries or other regions? There's a culture, can the culture be implemented there as much as we know with the public information we have or interviews or stuff we do? Does it make financial sense? Will it create value? I'm sure everybody asks the same question.

But we start from people because when we were in just the two countries, one or two, and we decided to start expanding to other countries, the biggest motivator was not size, it was people. At that time we were attracting so many great talents, we said, "Man, in 41 countries the career choices we can offer are not very appealing because there's a big funnel. There's only one country ahead, one head of marketing at the end and we're going to lose a lot of these people that were investing so much back to the market."

And then somebody thought, "Hey, if we go to a different country, we're going to have two paths, two country heads, two country market managers, two this, two that, and they're going to learn from different environments and the feedback will loop back and forth." So we started doing that, but we had doubts whether our culture would travel well.

So went through the first country said, "Okay. We want to have one company, one culture, does it travel well?" Then we saw, "Yeah, it does travel well because our stuff's about common sense." Our company became more attractive because now you could develop an international and then global career within our company, growing every time you move. The company is its people and its culture, that's what defines the company. So if we're more attractive now to attract talent and to retain talents, the company has better prospects to the future.

Patrick: [00:51:41] What are you most proud of in your career?

Carlos: [00:51:44] I think the thing I'm most proud of, of the people we develop here. The people that I remember in a college setting, talking to them about joining our company. They came and joined us because they believe in what we're saying and they prosper here, they blossom here. I think for me, that's amazing.

And that because I've been here for 31 years, I've had multiple chances of experiencing that and that's one of the biggest pleasures I have, is remembering that person; not that I hire them about a year, I was there at the very early stages of their career in a mentorship position or just part of my team or just interacting in meetings or market visits, and then to see those people invest a lot of time thinking about people in our company.

So twice a year, we sit without my team and we talk about the top leaders of the company. Are they stretched? Are they motivated? Are they excited about the future? Are they rightly informed about their feedback loops and how their careers are going and stuff? What should be the next step? And how soon should that be? And social reports.

We spend a lot of time in what we call the people chess, because since we don't have career tracks we have career options. There's no set path for you. If you joined here, tomorrow you could be elsewhere unless you're a specialist. We have lots of people that will go from sales to marketing, to supply chain, to other things in the company so they know the business. We need both. We need specialists and generalists as well. But going back to your point, that's what I take a lot of pleasure, is seeing as people develop.

Patrick: [00:53:12] Is there anything about the business that you think is central to its success and its distinctiveness that we haven't covered so far that you think is important?

Carlos: [00:53:23] Yeah, our love for beer.

Patrick: [00:53:25] Yeah, that's a good one.

Carlos: [00:53:26] We love our products.

Patrick: [00:53:27] Say a bit more about that. What's your favorite beer?

Carlos: [00:53:30] Well, it's here on my shirt Budweiser.

Patrick: [00:53:32] There you go. Bud light or Bud heavy?

Carlos: [00:53:35] Bud traditional, Budweiser, the red Bud. What I said here is so obvious. And again, as a company we're far from perfect, we have gaps in many places and always learning. We build our company actually by getting inspiration from others. We try not to reinvent what's already available.

But one thing that from day one, and it continues to amaze us is that other companies don't do the same, is invest in people, that's the only sustainable competitive advantage. And everything in a company comes from the people you have and the culture they all subscribe to. As I said, everything else is a consequence.

Patrick: [00:54:11] Two fun closing questions for you; the first, is there an example of a beer that when you tried it for the first time is the most memorable to you?

Carlos: [00:54:20] Oh yeah, the draft beer we have in Brazil called Brahma draft.

Patrick: [00:54:24] What's the memory? When did you first taste it?

Carlos: [00:54:26] It was amazing because when I joined the company, I was not really a beer drinker. When you start looking at the process and the brewing process and the quality of the... and the care and the history and then at the end of all that you drink a draft fresh beer from the tank in the brewery, that's what's hard to forget because you are at the brewery you go through the whole process and then at the end you try to find a product from the tank fresh and that's amazing.

Patrick: [00:54:55] You talk so much about ownership, I think that's a nice place to turn to my final question because I think the way you defined ownership, which I'll remember, is you take pride in the thing that you're offering to the consumer. You're proud that you were part of the process. And I love the draft straight from the tank, it is a great mental model for that. I ask everybody that I talk to you the same closing question. That question is, what is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Carlos: [00:55:20] People that bet on me. People that believe that I could go places and decided to bet on me. I've always had mentors throughout my life and I always tell people when I go to colleges, again to recruit, if there was a really important thing in life is to have a great mentor. As you progress, you'll have different mentors. But to have great mentors, people that are willing to they're truly interested in your success and they are willing to take the risk to tell you in a constructive, respectful way what you need to hear, this is invaluable.

And if you find people that are interested in your success and willing to tell you what you need to hear, this is gold because most people are afraid of telling you what you need to hear because they don't have that kind of relationship with you or they're not really interested in your success because they're afraid of competition because they have a role, whatever. So people that are great mentors, their goal, they're really good. But I think the kindest thing is really my family and the people that put up with me every day. At home, my wife and kids, my parents, I mean, they're the kindest people on earth.

Patrick: [00:56:26] Carlos, this has been such a fun conversation. I think the principles that you've laid out are going to help anybody listening run their businesses better. Thank you so much for your time today.

Carlos: [00:56:35] You're welcome. Have a great day.

Created by @ScarrottKalani

 

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
