
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released July 20th, 2021
Invest Like the Best
Stephen Mandel - Investing Behind Change
Steve Mandel is the founder of Lone Pine Capital, one of the most successful hedge fund and investment firms of this generation. We cover how the investing business has evolved since Steve started in the 1980s, why it’s so difficult to drive alpha by shorting stocks today, and why Steve still loves to get into the guts of a business.

00:00:00
01:10:22
Introduction
Patrick: [00:03:00] My guest today is Steve Mandel, founder of Lone Pine Capital, one of the most successful hedge fund and investment firms of this generation. In our conversation, we discussed how the investing business has evolved since Steve's start in the 1980s, why it's so difficult to drive alpha by shorting stocks today relative to 20 years ago, and why Steve still loves getting into the guts of a business. Steve shares his lessons through a variety of great stories, which made this such a fun experience. Please enjoy my conversation with Steve Mandel.

Learning from Retail
Patrick: [00:03:50] Steve, an appropriate place to start this, what will be a wide ranging conversation that I've really been looking forward to, is to set the early stage of your career. Because I think one of the most interesting topics we'll cover is what has changed the most and what has changed the least across your investing career. When we were talking on the phone in preparation for this, there are some great anecdotes from the mid to late '90s around shorting, and the way that information was disseminated through the system, and one about Walmart really stood out to me. I thought that would be an interesting place to start - your experience with Walmart, the company, the stock, everything it taught you about investing and about business and how different things used to be back then. Can you talk about your first encounter with Walmart and why that might be an appropriate interesting company to frame our conversation?

Steve: [00:04:36] Well, I think it's a very appropriate company to frame the conversation because Sam was my idol actually. I was a retailing analyst at Goldman Sachs back in the '80s. I started out as a food and drug retailing because I won't go into this, but I had a background looking at supermarkets as a consultant before joining Goldman Sachs. Walmart was getting into the food business and my colleague and mentor Joe Ellis was the person following Walmart. He was good enough to hand it off to me, I think in 1985 or '6, somewhere in there. It was my most important stock that I was following and I spent a lot of time there. The world was a very different place. When Walmart reported earnings, they reported them during market hours. There was no conference call. I literally had to go into a separate room. There was no internet or anything. I had to go into a separate room with a teletype machine and rip the paper off the machine as it was coming across with their earnings. The earnings had some level of detail, but then I would literally call up the CFO to get other data items that weren't in the release.

Then I would put something out over the Goldman Sachs system. That was basically it. There was no, they beat the number, the whisper number. There was none of that. The earnings just came out and it was usually pretty uneventful, and that was it.

Patrick: [00:06:04] What about Sam made him an idol to you in terms of how he built and ran this business? I think he was in mid 40s when he started Walmart, so he got a late start. Sort of an interesting backstory.

Steve: [00:06:13] Yeah. He was in his mid 40s is right. I had never seen anybody before really or since who had the capacity to connect with people and make them feel like they were the most important thing to him. I used to talk to other guys at Walmart about ... We would try and guess how many people he knew by name. We would come to like 100,000 people by name. I would go every year to the Walmart annual meeting. The Walmart annual meeting was held in the University of Arkansas field house where they play basketball and stuff. In the beginning, that field house was not air conditioned because basketball is played in the winter and that was not a need to air condition it and it was never used in the summer much, and the annual meeting takes place in June. Actually after a while, Sam's brother, Bud, donated the money to build the new field house, which is where they hold it now.

But anyway, every Walmart store would get to send three employees. Excuse me, they're not called employees at Walmart. They're called associates. They would come by an air conditioned school bus from around the country. Sometimes a 20 hour drive or whatever. They would go right to the field house. They might arrive at 3:00 in the morning or whatever. Sam would be there at 5:00 in the morning. I would always make sure to get there early just to sort of watch this. He would stand up on the podium, there on the stage and all the people who were there would kind of crowd in front. They're probably only maybe a few thousand people there. The place holds 14,000 or something, and there was spill over into another place. He would just be answering questions and he'd go, "Betty Lou, I was in your crafts department in Ocala, Florida, and your VPI item was just incredible." You'd see, Betty Lou just go like, "Oh my God." I was just captivated by that. His office was this little plastic faux wood paneling, 8 by 12 foot little room. Just how he conducted the Saturday morning meeting, they would have a Saturday morning meeting at 7:00 AM for all the key people. All the regional managers would be out in the field, flew back for that, and all the key merchants and finance people, et cetera, would be at that meeting. Just how he conducted that meeting and how he motivated that crew was just something to watch.

The great thing was, at the time, this was, I guess, pre-rule FD and all that kind of stuff, you as an analyst could participate. I mean, not watch or ask questions, but it was kind of a great thing.

Patrick: [00:08:47] I'm sure a quadrant that we'll come back to a number of times during the conversation is the notion of good business quality and good management quality. Whether you have both or you have one, or you have none is interesting from an investing standpoint. I think in the case of Walmart, maybe related to software, which we'll talk about later too, is this concept of sort of design the store once and print it many times. Obviously a lot more involved in the case of a store than software. But this elegant concept of a unit, which is viable that can be replicated. How did you start to build your understanding of that two by two quadrant, again, maybe with Walmart or other companies as an example? How do you think about the juxtaposition of business to management quality?

Steve: [00:09:24] When people talk about margin of safety in investing, they usually talk about things that are financial in nature. They talk about asset value or they talk about sustainable return on equity or whatever. I'm much more focused on nature of business franchise and the replicability of that, and the quality of the people running it.

Now, the quality of people running it obviously can change. You have the Warren buffet thing, you should invest in a company that a chimp could run because someday a chimp will run it. But I've always leaned more towards the business quality aspect of it.

Retailing was an interesting area to grow up in as an investor because it is a rapidly changing field and there's always winners and always losers. It does get to your notion of the business unit replicability. If you look at a lot of ... It's changed a little bit in the last few years or more recent times, but many of the richest people in the world are retailers.

Patrick: [00:10:31] Number one right now, I think.

Steve: [00:10:32] It gets to both the scale of the market, but also when you have a better mouse trap and can replicate it. That was certainly true in the case of Walmart, but there's many, many examples of this around the world. You can look at Zara and you can look at IKEA and there're examples all over the world of this. It needs to be incrementally better. It does not have to be leaps and bounds better. That was one thing that I learned from Walmart and others in retailing.

Patrick: [00:11:00] What about your lens on the investing world do you think is most distinct because of that retailing background? Relative to somebody that came up in, I don't know, energy or in software or something, what's the most unique way that it trained you?

Steve: [00:11:14] Retailing is a lot about culture and it taught me to look at culture and understand what makes a good culture and what doesn't make a good culture. It taught me also about how things can be replicated and what scale means and what can be done with scale I would say those are probably the two biggest things.

Patrick: [00:11:36] How high is the variance of culture in retailers? What is bad culture in a retailer?

Steve: [00:11:42] Well, bad culture, and I will not name this company, but there was a company I used to follow way back at Goldman Sachs whose basic idea of how we be successful financially is if we screw our suppliers enough, screw our landlords enough and screw our customers enough, there'll be money left over for us.

Patrick: [00:12:01] One way to do it.

Steve: [00:12:04] That is what I would describe as a bad culture. There have been retailers that were modestly successful for a reasonable period of time until that catches up with them. I say that the best model is clearly one that wins for everybody. Wins for your employees, wins for your customers, wins for your suppliers and then ends up winning for your shareholders.

Costco is the one to me that has demonstrated that maybe more than any other. Where the employees get paid the best and treated the best in terms of benefits, et cetera, in retailing. No one charges lower prices. Vendors love them because they're totally straightforward and simple to deal with. They get paid on time and they do business in huge volume. And the shareholder is one.

Patrick: [00:12:46] If you think about, back to the Sam Walton example, aspects of his management style, and maybe even Walmart's culture that might be replicable, like remembering all those names, most people can't do that. Sometimes there's just things that make people special that you can't replicate. But if you could somehow Sam Walton some aspect of what you loved about him and that culture and install it in other companies, what would it be?

Steve: [00:13:11] There's been controversy about this, for sure. But I think treating their people with respect. Walmart has been critiqued over the years for many things, but they have always treated their people with respect. That doesn't mean that they were necessarily paying the highest scale, but they offered people, and this was probably more true in the early days when it was still growing like crazy, a great chance to advance. They took many, many people ... Including Doug McMillan, who's the CEO now started working at age 16 part-time in a store. There are just example after example, after example of, they took people from working part-time in the summer after school, whatever, to rising up through the management ranks.

I think ultimately particularly in a business that requires tons of people, which is one of the things that retailing does, even Amazon requires tons of people, even though they don't have stores or they have some stores, but very few, you have to treat your people right and give them opportunity.

Patrick: [00:14:17] How do you think about what the essence of a retailer even is given the rate of change, given the Amazons of the world, the fact that physical stores, who knows what will happen in the future, but the nature of what's important has changed. What is the core essential of retail?

Steve: [00:14:32] That is still the same, which is, you are curating some group of products. Whether you're making them in yourself or you're buying them from others, but you are curating an array of products to offer to customers. You are pricing them at a certain level relative to the marketplace, and you are getting them to the customer in a certain way. That may be having the customer pick them up themselves in the store, that may be delivering them to the customer's door. There's a whole variety of ways that the product moves from the retailer or actually even the manufacturer to the customer. But that's the essence of it. You're curating a group of products. You are figuring out how to price them and you're figuring out how to get them to the consumer.

Patrick: [00:15:16] If we go back to the room where you're tearing the sheet away to get the financials in middle of the business day, can you discuss how you think information dissemination was back then versus today? That happens, there's new financial information on Walmart, back then, how long would it take for the stock to properly reflect approximately the new information?

Steve: [00:15:41] I put it on two levels. If there was a significant surprise, let's say a company had been banging out 20% earnings increases and then all of a sudden, now-

Patrick: [00:15:50] Nothing. Yeah.

Steve: [00:15:51] ... they weren't, that reaction would be instant then as it is now. But in many cases, there are things that were much more subtle that wouldn't be reflected until some analyst was smart enough to suss it out.

I remember there were a lot of companies that I followed then that literally they might report at 5:00 PM and all that would come out would be sales and net income. No balance sheet, no funds flow statement, no complete income statement, nothing.

It was basically up to you or the investor, the analyst, whoever, to call up the company and get the rest of the information. Again, some of this was pre-rule FD. I mean, when I was a sell-side analyst at Goldman, and even when I joined Tiger in the earlier days, we'd just call up these companies, "How were sales last week." They would tell you.

Patrick: [00:16:42] Tell you.

Steve: [00:16:45] Frankly, that sometimes was an edge because not everybody was actually doing that, hard as that is to believe. Now we have 18 zillion-

Patrick: [00:16:51] Microscopic.

Steve: [00:16:52] ... tracking services that tell you how sales were this morning.

Patrick: [00:16:57] If you think about the nature of edge and how that has evolved through time ... This is another way of asking what has most changed? The very slow burn edge, which is find a great company, own it forever and have some insight early on and some ongoing support of that insight. Then there's the super fast information arbitrage, or what have you. When you started Lone Pine, had I asked you back then if I was an LP or something, define your edge, how would you have defined it at the start?

Steve: [00:17:22] I think the same way I would define it now, but with a little bit of a twist on the short side versus the long side. On the long side, I think it's really the same. We have invested pretty much forever behind change largely. When I say that, sometimes it can be a large technological change, sometimes it can be a managerial change, sometimes it could be a regulatory change, but something that is changing the dynamic for a multi-year period. Investing behind those big areas of change has generally been what we've done on the long side forever. I don't think that really has changed.

Clearly what you started alluding to before in terms of the amount and type of data and the speed with which you could access that data has changed dramatically with the internet, largely. That's helpful in understanding companies and analyzing them, but it really has very little to do ... We are not making any decisions about, "Gee, we just saw a little change in inflection in sales this quarter, and we're going to barrel in behind something or dump something as a result of that." No.

The other dynamic is, on the long side, the actors have changed quite a bit. There weren't ETFs, passive was small, hedge funds were small. But there was a large amount of aggregate money invested long in public stocks. Whether it's an ETF or a large mutual fund or a hedge fund or a family office or whatever, they own the stocks and somebody buys them and somebody sells them. There's still sort of the same supply-demand dynamic.

On the short side, it changes a lot because, at the beginning there weren't a lot of hedge funds. It wasn't that big a business. The competition on the short side was much, much less than it is now. When there's incremental capital playing on the short side, that does change the supply-demand dynamic. Because it's actually truly incremental to incremental demand for a limited supply of good short-

Patrick: [00:19:28] Of borrowing. Yeah.

Steve: [00:19:29] ... ideas. Of borrowing and good short ideas. The way I phrase it was, a lot of the things that we did back in the late '90s and early 2000s shorting in the internet and telecom bubble, we absolutely couldn't do today. I mean, there was no problem borrowing Pets.com and eToys and Onsale and all these crazy things. Today, when things like that appear in the markets, the borrow cost shoots up to ridiculous levels immediately, the access to borrow is very limited. The best shorts, if you will, the things that generally are retail driven and large misinterpretations of the economics of the business, are much harder to execute.

Patrick: [00:20:15] Does it then mean that the emphasis on shorting as a potential source of return has just diminished in your mind?

Steve: [00:20:21] Yes. Back to your earlier question, they phrased it a little differently, but when I was going around with my tin cup starting this business and investors would basically ask me like, "how are you going to make me money?" I would say, "Well, this long side is a very efficient thing. If we can scratch out a couple of hundred basis points a year of alpha on the longs, that'd be pretty good. But the short thing is very inefficient and we think we can really do quite well with that. That'll be a larger source of "alpha" than the longs."

That actually for our first, until the financial crisis was true. Since the financial crisis, that has definitely not been true. There's two major factors in that statement. One, interest rates were very different pre-financial crisis and post, and there's just the P&L dynamic of short rebate, et cetera, that plays with that. But then second, there's just way more competition. The whole notion of these platforms, Millennium, Citadel, et cetera, that really, I mean, barely existed back in the late '90s. Now there are hundreds and hundreds of these pods out there competing every day.

Investing Behind Change
Patrick: [00:21:26] If we go back to this core idea, which I really like of investing behind change, obviously it begs the question what real change looks like and maybe what fools gold there is. Something that seems like it's a big new trend or change, but in fact, it's not. What have you learned about assessing trends and sources of change and underwriting them as separate concepts before you get to the companies themselves?

Steve: [00:21:48] Well, it usually does start the other way around. It usually starts with the companies, and then we figure out that they're part of a trend. You're right, things don't last forever. Some last much longer than others. In our early days, wireless was I think our single biggest area back in the late '90s, early 2000s. That was when smartphones hadn't even existed yet, people carrying cell phones was not ubiquitous. As that grew and developed, it was a terrific growth business and all that. We surmise that all the big incumbent telecoms would have to get into the business and they'd probably have to get into it by buying some of the companies that we invested in. But after a period of time, it's a commodity business and we haven't owned anything in the wireless space in, I don't know, probably 15 plus years.

But other things have much longer legs. Payments, which is a huge area for us now and has been a big area for a long time. The move from cash and check to digital forms of payments has been going on for quarter a century or whatever, longer and it still has a long way to go. It's still innovating and new forms are being created. It's still a really dynamic area of change, even though it's been for a long, long time. When you see something where either the market itself is not that big or the incremental innovation is quite marginal, that's where you stay away basically.

When you see something where either the market itself is not that big or the incremental innovation is quite marginal, that's where you stay away basically.

Patrick: [00:23:19] Before we leave shorting, because I think it's such an interesting evolution, you have some fantastic stories from sort of what I'll call the scars of shorting.

Steve: [00:23:25] There're still scars. I mean, fresh scars all the time.

Patrick: [00:23:31] Some of my favorite examples were ones you described to me in the late '90s. I think right in the early days of Lone Pine, Books-A-Million was one I think that stands out. Maybe it was after Thanksgiving, I can't remember the exact details. Tell us a story or two, just how vicious short markets can be for investors.

Steve: [00:23:47] Well, they can be very vicious. Our first year in business was 1998. I don't know if people remember, but it was a pretty tumultuous year. This is the Russian debt crisis. There was a run emerging markets. The Hong Kong authorities jumped in, in I think August of '98 and actually bought 10% of the index. Greenspan came in and basically eased big time monetarily and speculation went wild in the fall of '98.

We had come through the Russian debt crisis and all that doing pretty nicely. Then we were short a number of things in the internet and telecom space that we thought did not have business models that were going to survive. I'll tell one particular one was a company called Onsale. It was founded by the guy who founded Go computers. It was a pen based computer thing. The business model was buying last year's HP and Compaq computers and peripherals one year out of date, last year's models, and selling them online out of a warehouse in California.

The company was basically bleeding...It had 100 million dollars of cash on the balance sheet. It was bleeding $20 million of cash a quarter. It never made underwriter estimate, et cetera. It had been public, I don't know, for two or three quarters. In the third quarter of '98, September quarter, they reported earnings mid October. Again, same thing, burning cash, no sign of this business is actually going to create any value. The stock was $12 and we were short 50 basis points of the stock. Six weeks later, on no news, the stock was 108. Nine fold increase in six weeks. I still have not looked to ... I think I know the answer, that we stuck with the short, but obviously cutting it back a fair bit along the way. The company was bankrupt like a year later and I'm sure we lost money on it in aggregate.

The other one that always sticks in my mind, this was the day I feared the most, every year was the day after Thanksgiving because it was the day when a lot of people were at home, echoes of what's going on now know, retail traders sitting at their desks. It was a half trading day, so a shorter period of time. That day, day after Thanksgiving 1998, market closing at 13:00 or whatever, there was a company called Books-A-Million. We were fortunately not short the stock going into that day, that operated a chain of, I think a couple of hundred bookstores in strip centers in the Southeast. The stock was $5 going into that day. They announced that day, before the open, that they were going to have a website to sell books. Not that they had one, but they were going to have one. Amazon at that point in time was a-

Patrick: [00:26:25] It was a real thing. Yeah.

Steve: [00:26:36] Well, but it was a small thing and all they sold were books and DVDs. Anyway, Books-A-Million that day, I think it was probably a 100 million dollar market cap company. I don't remember. But closed that day at 39.

Patrick: [00:26:41] From five.

Steve: [00:26:42] So when we look at AMC and GameStop and all this going on now, we've seen this before.

Building Lone Pine
Patrick: [00:26:49] Before we get into some of the things that I think are most interesting in the zones of change, I'll call them, in today's world, I'd love to understand how you thought about building and structuring the firm itself. With a couple of things in mind, one to obviously produce great investment returns and sort of people that can fuel that. But also in terms of things like succession and culture and how to make it something as a firm itself enduring in the same way that a great business might be. Can you talk about in the early days, how you thought through those things beyond just alpha and how that's evolved over time?

Steve: [00:27:21] I had the benefit of I worked at three different places before I started Lone Pine. I learned a ton at each of those three places and had really good mentors at each of those three places. I learned a ton about businesses and investing, but I also learned a ton about what works well and what doesn't work well in terms of how to organize a business. If I hadn't had that benefit and I had tried to do this 10 years earlier or something, I'm 100% certain we would have failed. I worked at a consulting firm called Mars & Company where I had a mentor named Didier Pain as in French for bread, who taught me a lot about businesses and how they work. Then I was a retail analyst at Goldman. I worked under a gentleman named Joe Ellis, who also taught me a lot and was a great mentor. Then work with Julian Robertson at Tiger, and he taught me a lot. Different things in each case, but a lot.

Patrick: [00:28:16] Does one lesson stand out from each? Just for fun as a sampler.

Steve: [00:28:19] Didier taught me really the details of how to dive into the guts of a business, and that's what we did there. Joe taught me a lot about how to present things actually, interestingly enough, but also a lot about retailing and managements and all that. Julian, I mean, I think there were two things. One, just how a hedge fund works and how the balance sheet works and doesn't work and all those things, but also just such a stickler about people. About integrity, about smarts, about background, about everything just burnished into the brain.

Anyway, I learned a lot, not only about those things, but each of those businesses were run differently, had different ownership, structures, different comp structures, all those things. I took what I thought were the good things from all those things and some of the things that were not so good and tried to leave those out and bring in all the good things. The overarching thing when we started was to try and create a business that was going to go on for a long time and outlast me.

What did we do? That's how we set up our ownership structure, which is very broad ownership and not a, as is somewhat typical in the financial services business and certainly in the hedge fund business, not a lords and serfs type thing. People who are not investment people are also owners and very much a part of this business. We wanted to be as fair and transparent as possible, so we charged enough so we could cover our overhead, but not what the market would bear. We charged less than what the market would bear. We set up a variety of fee structures to allow people choice, but also to give us greater duration of capital should they want to get a lower fee for - we have no lockups - but for capital commitments that you have a penalty associated with if you get out early. We wanted to have a very diversified LP base, so we sought that.

Then within the business, just trying to do a lot of the little things, I guess I would call them. Some of them not so little, that are both signals to people, but also make people want to come to work every day. This is from just having the best healthcare we can provide to the most generous 401(k), to buying people breakfast and lunch, to establishing the Lone Pine Foundation where every single employee is a board member. Little clues also, like every office here is the same size. We don't have different gradations of that. We have the glass fronted offices on the inside and the assistants on the outside. That was something I saw at Tiger, which actually makes the span of views better because it's not chopped up by offices, but it also gives the more junior people better views basically to the outside. Not that our view is largely of I-95, so it was not the greatest view in the world. But, it's a great office building. Nothing against this office building.

But what I did was I wrote a business plan, literally day one, which was July 1. I mean, before we actually took in money, in July 1 1997, I wrote a business plan. It was Celia Canning and me in a eight by 12 foot windowless room. I still can't type. She typed it and I took it on the road. I went for the next two or three weeks, I think, something like that to a lot of people that I knew and some people I didn't know and cold called people. I said, "Here's what we're doing. What do you think?" I took input from that, made some tweaks and changes-

Patrick: [00:32:00] Iterated, yeah.

Steve: [00:32:01] ... and iterated, and then sent out a ... Today it would be a mass email. Then it was mass mailing then. Snail mail to, I don't know, 200 or 300 people. Both lawyers and accountants and bankers and all that kind of stuff, but also potential LPs, potential employees. Here's what we're doing. It laid everything out and it laid out our philosophy of doing business. It laid out what the fee structures were going to be, how we were going to invest, et cetera. That's how I built it iteratively over the next few months.

Patrick: [00:32:31] If you zoom to the decision to make sure that there was a point at which you were not the person, the roadblock, if you will, day to day running the firm, talk me through that decision and process.

Steve: [00:32:42] Well, there was no real plan at the beginning. It was just an idea. It was an idea that was backstopped by having broad ownership structure, having a relatively concentrated team, et cetera. But day one, I didn't know ... None of the analysts I had worked with before. We started out, there were six of us. I had not worked with any of them before at the beginning. Somewhat of a crapshoot. I didn't know exactly who was going to turn out to be what.

Over time, I got to know them and they got to know me. Of course that cast of characters changed over time. But particularly in areas where I was less knowledgeable, I started handing off that responsibility. We had no fixed amount of capital allocated. You have 200 million or whatever for Sarah Gordon in healthcare. Then it was Mala in telecom and then Marco and Dave Craver. We would just manage that within the constraints of our balance sheet. We had guideposts in terms of where we would not go in terms of gross and net exposure, et cetera. But they were making the decisions long and short.

That's been going on for 20 years. Changed in certain ways over time, but basically that was the idea and that's how we've evolved. That translated to last three years, now, the three of them Mala, Dave Craver and Kelly Granat have been making the investment decisions and not me. I'm still piping in. Sometimes they listen, sometimes they don't, but they've been making the decisions.

Patrick: [00:34:11] What have you I learned over time about what makes for a good analyst or not?

Steve: [00:34:15] There are a lot of things, but one thing that we've learned or I've learned is, people can be unbelievably smart. But if they're very linear thinkers, it will never work as an analyst. We are always dealing in shades of gray, probabilities. If somebody has to know the answer to a math problem or whatever, if they have to know the answer, there is never the answer in our world. Those people can be incredibly smart and might be winning Nobel prizes or whatever, but they can't work in our world because our world is all about probabilities and weighing outcomes. If that makes you uncomfortable, it's just not going to work.

One thing that we've learned, or I've learned is, people can be unbelievably smart. But if they're very linear thinkers, it will never work as an analyst.

Patrick: [00:34:58] If you think of yourself today as an analyst, and you mentioned this lesson from the first op of getting into the guts of a business, what does that look like today? Getting into the guts. How has that changed?

Steve: [00:35:11] I don't think it has changed a ton. I do think we have more resources to do that with than we did 20 plus years ago, but it certainly means getting to know the people, running the business yourself. We have far more data to work with now than we ever did then through web scraping, et cetera, et cetera, or things like Glassdoor. I mean, there's all kinds of things-

Patrick: [00:35:34] So many things.

Steve: [00:35:35] ... that are inputs to our process that didn't exist before. But the basic process is the same. We have more inputs to the process, but it's basically the same.

Patrick: [00:35:45] What when you're in the guts is most exciting to you? What are the moments you look for?

Steve: [00:35:49] Well, that to me is the single most fun part of the job and what keeps me excited. We see it all the time now. I mean, there's more innovation and more amazing things happening in the business world than ever before. Learning about how Costco became the dominant seller of premium olive oil in America is something that just excites me tremendously.

Patrick: [00:36:20] What happened?

Steve: [00:36:23] I'll take cashews. It's the same thing in olive oil. They go to Planters and they say, "Gee, we would like you to produce for us a larger cashew, and just for us." Planters was like, "No, we can't do that. Dah, dah, dah." They figure out and they go direct to the growers and they disintermediate Planters and they sell whatever, the highest market share of premium nuts in the country. The same with olive oil, they go direct to the growers in Italy. They start out buying. "Mr. Grower, you've got this great olive oil production thing here. We'll try this out. We'll buy a container load." They're like, "A container load? That's pretty good." Now they're buying multiple container loads. We invested privately in this company that's now public, FIGS. I don't know if you know -

Patrick: [00:37:08] Sure. Yeah, the scrubs.

Steve: [00:37:09] Right, the scrubs. When I learned about this, I was like, "This is just awesome." Because I was sitting there thinking every little niche in retailing has been-

Patrick: [00:37:23] Mined.

Steve: [00:37:24] ... mined and pored over, and here's a fairly large business that has just been done horribly. Terrible product, terrible way it goes to market. These two women figured it out and they figured out in a very organic way. One of them, a friend, like, "Let me sew something for you that's better." They've also built ... The other exciting aspect about it is one of the things that the web allows you to do and a direct to consumer model allows you to do is build community around your product. They've brilliantly, I think, had this be all about healthcare workers, making them better at their jobs, making their lives better, dah, dah, dah. Particularly the pandemic obviously helped some with that. But created this just brilliant community around the product. We're not a huge investors in health healthcare, but you just look at what's going on there with stuff in immunotherapy, continuous glucose monitors that are radically changing people's lives. It's just incredibly exciting.

I mean, we own a small hospital chain in China. Seeing what they're doing and how they can take over a hospital and improve outcomes, that's what's exciting about this job.

Zones of Change
Patrick: [00:38:32] You've mentioned a few in passing, zones of big change that are happening today. I'd love to just pick on a few of them and just hear you riff on them. You mentioned payments a few times. This is a fascinating one. I think people understand the move to digital payments as a general concept, but what still is so interesting this as a place of exploration?

Steve: [00:38:50] I think many aspects of the banking business now are being partially disintermediated by digital payments companies. It's been amazing to watch these wallets develop and the amount of customers they get, the amount of money that goes into this, you know Square Cash, et cetera, has been just a real eye-opener to me.

I mean, I realize that millennials, et cetera, are doing everything through their phone, but to watch many banking functions, Forex, regular old transfer money to either individuals or paying bills happening through apps, and the speed with which that's happening has just been eye-opening. Oftentimes I sort of an analogy is like little PT boats firing at the big aircraft carrier, which are the big banks and picking off not necessarily large elements of their P&L's, but areas where they've been earning very outsized returns and people willing to able to either do this much more efficiently and charge less and still make good money doing so.

Then just watching the level of innovation at the online checkout to watch ... I don't know how familiar you are with the Shop Pay app and-

Patrick: [00:40:06] Sure. Yeah.

Steve: [00:40:07] ... how it works, but just watching how that's iterated and gotten better and better over time and many things that have enabled small merchants who several years ago were hopeless selling on the web. Now they have all the tools at their disposal to quickly get up online, facilitate transactions, market themselves, manage their inventory. I think there's a lot that's still happening and it's beyond just a consumer to business payment. It's business to business payments, it's consumer to consumer payments. It's the software around facilitating the payments. It's the software around all the other aspects of running a small business. It's a area of tremendous innovations.

Patrick: [00:40:54] I had an experience the other day where I bought something with Shop Pay and it does that thing where it texts you the code and then you have to fill it in. The first friction they removed was, it would just auto fill it in from your text. This time it happened where like the whole loop happened without me even doing anything.

Steve: [00:41:08] Yeah. No, it is the best product out there.

Patrick: [00:40:09] It's unbelievable.

Steve: [00:40:10] It is a great product. It will be interesting to see now that Google and Facebook have opened this up to them, what the uptake is because all those people who are merchants on Google or Facebook are using something. So they would have to switch. It will be interesting to see how that evolves.

Patrick: [00:41:29] What about just the nature of the consumer and their evolving preferences and ways of buying things? Is there something here that you think is still a zone of change? That could just be offline to online, but anything else more nuanced than just that broad trend that you think is important?

Steve: [00:41:44] Well, that is the biggest trend, for sure. But I do think this notion of community is really important in terms of how people are getting information, who they trust for that information, sometimes for good, sometimes work for bad as we see in our political sphere a little more. But people being able to build community around their product is something we hadn't really seen, not only before the web, but before that's how social media really amplifies what goes on for people selling.

Patrick: [00:42:16] How do you view software businesses? Especially, I love that going back to where we started, this retailer concept of you build some really effective unit or franchise, and it might be a web app today, that can then be reprinted for a lot of people's benefits and the economics are amazing. Everyone now knows that. It's not a secret that software is a great business. How do you think about that from an investor lens looking forward in 2021?

Steve: [00:42:39] Well, I'd say the only difficult thing is, yes, this is not lost on people and so valuations are the issue. When you get a great vertical software business, there's little that's better. Because it's very sticky, you generally have pricing power, and oftentimes you are riding on the back of something that's growing itself. Particularly if you have some type of per usage pricing.

The shocking thing to me about both the software business and the healthcare business, particularly as it relates to both biotech and medical products, is just how many companies there are out there and how many little ... Not even so little. Niches there are in the business, and how much there's sort of just continuous improvement that goes on. That's, I think ultimately what you have to be very mindful of in software. Is not so much are the big legacy incumbents suddenly going to rear their heads up and take market share from you, the newer cloud-based guy, but is the next guy coming along to kind of take it from you.

Because the amount of capital that it takes to get into the business is not high. The barriers are really around, well, both IP and then habit. Stickiness from just not wanting to change and processes embedded in your organization. But that being said, I mean, we are still finding new innovative software companies all the time. The prices that one needs to pay to play are the issue. You have to be pretty damn sure that this company is still going to be vibrant and growing nicely out in '25 and '26 to be able to get the math to work.

Patrick: [00:44:28] Do you find that the best quality management teams, thinking back to Sam again here, are always thinking about the nature of their competitive advantage as a business? It's not just serve the customer, but there's things that we can do as a business that defend us from would be competitors. Do you find that instinct common amongst the great managers that you've encountered over the years?

Steve: [00:44:50] Two things, I think they understand what their competitive advantage is, if they have one. Second, they are always looking over their shoulder.

I always remember being sort of ... I won't name the companies here because it doesn't reflect well on them. But there were two companies in the same business. One was the leader and one was kind of the number two. I would ask each, "What have you learned from the other guy?" The leader basically said, "I never spend any time on the other guy. They're not as good as we are and our numbers are better and dah, dah, dah." The other guy was always looking at this guy. The second guy ended up being better than the first guy overtime because they improve, they learn things, they stole things from the first guy.

I think understanding what makes customers come to you and why you have some kind of edge over somebody else, because it's the rare thing. I mean, maybe a drug in its early stage of being on patent, but it's the rare thing in any field where you sort of have a quasi monopoly. You have relatively intense competence.

This is what sort of gets me about some of these FTC cases that have existed in retailing or the ones that are popping up now. I remember I had to testify at the trial of when the FTC objected to the Staples Office Depot merger, way, way back in 20 years ago. The company sued to try and overturn it and there was a trial and I was an expert witness at the trial. The FTC's case was that, in markets where Staples, Office Depot and OfficeMax were the three office supply superstores operated, when there was only two, that was anti-competitive. There were lots of markets where there were only two. But my argument was, "Well, wait a minute. There's Walmart and Costco and all kinds of catalog retailers and online. If you want to buy copy paper or pens and pencils ..."

Patrick: [00:46:55] Lots of ways to do it.

Steve: [00:46:56] ... "or an HP printer or whatever, it's hard to imagine a more competitive ... There's a lot of ways to do it." I mean, you don't have to just go to an Office. But that was the FTC's argument, and I'm sitting there making this argument to the judge, Judge Hogan as I remember. He's nodding and smiling and I'm thinking, "This is great." Ruled against it.

Patrick: [00:47:16] How has pace as a variable in the work that you do changed in importance? Because in the venture world where I spend a lot of time, it's become, we talk about table stakes, you have to move ridiculously fast.

Steve: [00:47:27] In the public markets, you don't have to do that.

Patrick: [00:47:30] You get a chance every day.

Steve: [00:47:31] Yeah. There's a price every day, and we're relatively newer, the last three years or so to private investing. I mean, we did a little bit before that, but really in any significant way, the last three years. That's a different game. I mean, there are times when it's a fire drill and you have to sort of all hands on deck and drop everything else and make a decision with less than perfect ... I mean, not that information we have ... Even in the public markets, it's never perfect, but less information than we'd like to have.

Those markets have evolved in recent years to a point, and I don't think this was really probably ever the case even 5 or 10 years ago, where people were using capital and balance sheet size, et cetera, as a competitive weapon and trying to clear the field before other people had a chance to do anything. You have to adapt in this business and it doesn't mean you have to play it. There's no one saying you have to invest in something. Sometimes you play when you feel like you have done adequate due diligence and can make a good decision. Other times, you just say, can't play.

Patrick: [00:48:41] To some of the young investors that are listening, the story you told earlier about reading the information during the business day off the tele machine will sound silly. What do you think about today's world will we view similarly in 20 years time looking back as equally silly about how markets operate?

Steve: [00:48:57] I wish I knew the answer to that because there are going to be things, not just how markets operate, but things we do in our everyday lives that people are going to say-

Patrick: [00:49:06] Seem ridiculous.

Steve: [00:49:07] ... "These guys were just ..."

Patrick: [00:49:08] Idiots.

Steve: [00:49:12] Well, I always ... My father-in-law was an orthopedic surgeon and he describes the lecture hall in medical school, every chair had a little ashtray in the arm. This is a medical-

Patrick: [00:49:25] Medical school.

Steve: [00:49:26] ... school lecture hall and people are sitting there smoking. This is in the '50s. There are things that-

Patrick: [00:49:33] There are ashtrays similar today.

Steve: [00:49:34] Yeah. That we are doing. I wish I knew what they were because I would think hard about stopping doing them or changing how we're doing them. But I've thought about that and I'm not sure what those things are.

Patrick: [00:49:47] Do you think it would be good or bad if one of those things is some of the frictions that still remain around trading assets? Meaning crypto markets are 24/7, increasingly liquid. Do you think that all the world's assets, including stocks might move that direction, and would that be good or bad?

Steve: [00:50:03] Well, I think that might happen. I don't think it would be a good thing because I think I mean just totally selfishly, this job is enough 24/7 as it is. I mean, basically the only thing that I don't like about this job is that I look at Bloomberg 365 days a year, many multiple times per day, et cetera. You're chained to it. If the markets were 24/7, you'd probably be chained to it even more. Now markets around the world largely are 24/7. There's a brief time-

Patrick: [00:50:36] There's something open. Yeah.

Steve: [00:50:37] ... but it's only like New Zealand is open. I mean, that is probably more the trend. There are certain markets that undoubtedly where the friction costs will come down and it will become more efficient, et cetera, et cetera. It is shocking, to me anyway, in some parts of the fixed income world that it's still a kind of, who's your buddy and-

Patrick: [00:50:59] Back slapping trading.

Steve: [00:51:00] Yeah, and large bid-ask spread. The quoted is very different than the bid-ask spread when you actually go to transact. Those probably will get more fair, and that's a good thing if they do.

Advice for Others
Patrick: [00:51:13] As we wind down the discussion on business specifically and a couple of other topics to close with, if you were to create a curriculum, let's say, of companies whose whole history, a young would be analyst out there should study, to really just learn as much as possible, maybe Walmart is one of them. What are the other in your mind big, iconic business stories that have maybe changed a lot and adapted with the times or not or faltered that could teach people lessons?

Steve: [00:51:40] Well, I think the two in more recent times that come to mind are Amazon and Netflix, which are two businesses that literally were, I mean, maybe I'm overdramatizing, but some were on the brink of extinction and chose to make an enormous pivot. People forget, I always ask this question, Amazon started Amazon Prime ... I forget. Maybe 2002, something like that. The quarter before they started Amazon Prime, Amazon's total company revenues grew 9%. It was a young company, and that rate of growth had been declining. Amazon Prime, arguably, there are many important aspects of Amazon today, but it may be the single biggest-

Patrick: [00:52:27] Unlock.

Steve: [00:52:28] ... unlock, an element of glue in the company. It was sort of a bet the company thing. It started out at $79 or 79.95. The risk was that people were going to order one tube of toothpaste and crush them on shipping costs and it would be an economic negative. Obviously it turned out to be exactly the opposite and it would turn out to be a brilliant move, so there was that.

Then there've been a number ... I mean, obviously AWS was kind of a found thing through things they were doing internally and decided to sell it on the outside. How they've managed first party versus third party, how they've migrated in the advertising business, what the entertainment business does for them. There are many, many things and a number of things they failed with internally that I think are real lessons to be studied in terms of both risk-taking, how you incubate things within a large culture. I was a skeptic at the very beginning to be completely blunt. I didn't see how the economics and frankly, they weren't working at the outset. But he created value by pivoting and changing things that allowed them to work.

Netflix went through two enormous pivots. One was sending DVDs through the mail and you return them. Clearly the business was migrating to online and they had to make that pivot, which was-

Patrick: [00:53:54] Brutal.

Steve: [00:53:55] Yeah, brutal, and very unclear what the results of that were going to be. Then secondly, they realized, "Gee, if we're just in the game of bidding against others for so-and-so's already released movies, that's not much of a distinctive proposition. We got to spend a whole ton of money getting our own content produced." Both of those things, not only saved the company, but created value, but created significant moats. Those are two current last 25 year kind of companies that I would have people study for sure.

Patrick: [00:54:28] With something like Netflix, there's a joke online calling Debtflix where there's so much capital required to sort of ... The ante keeps going up. There are others that are also now at the ante table. How do you think about, even though it is obviously an incredible story, that interesting position where they're still having to produce? It's not like an Amazon third-party marketplace or something.

Steve: [00:54:53] Well, yeah, I mean, there was the argument, which was true for quite a while, that they're kind of like the hamster on the wheel. But those lines are crossing now. There's two ways to think about this. One is GAAP accounting, which is how long do you depreciate the content that you have created or acquired? The second is, are you producing more cash than you're spending? This year, the lines will probably pretty much cross in terms of producing as much as we're spending.

Now, each year in the future, they will likely have to spend more to stay in the game or ahead of the game, but the cashflows should go up faster which is the bet. At some point in the eight year future or something, GAAP earnings will equate to cash earnings as that cycle's through. We'll see.

We don't know what the future brings necessarily, but I think one thing to think about with Netflix that doesn't get a lot of focus is production and the local content in various countries around the world. How that content doesn't just work in those countries, but works in other places, and the value of that. I mean, I think certainly investors here in the US tend to look at Netflix and most companies in a very parochial way. We often fall victim to that, I'm sure. But there's a lot more nuance to it when you think about it through that lens.

Patrick: [00:56:20] Do you think that business building is an art form. Is that overdoing it?

Steve: [00:56:26] No, I don't think it's overdoing it. I think it is more an art form than something that is formulaic, for sure. It is constantly evolving. I mean, I just think about our business and how it has changed over the last 25 years or whatever. Unless you adapt ... You keep your basic principles, but you have to adapt your tactics, your structures, all of that over time or else you will not survive.

Patrick: [00:56:52] Have you found through your career that there's almost always one or two key levers that matter for a business?

Steve: [00:56:59] Yes. That is a thing we try and impress on our analysts here, et cetera. Just identify the one, two, three things that really matter here and let's own them, understand them, understand how they might change, understand the data sources to stay on top of them.

Patrick: [00:57:20] Can that be trained? Can you train people to get better at doing that?

Steve: [00:57:24] I think so, yes. In some cases it's relatively obvious, in other cases it's less so. Then you have businesses where the business is changing a bunch and the prime thing that Wall Street analysts had focused on is no longer the prime thing. United HealthCare is an example for me, where companies migrated from being basically a pure health insurer many, many years ago, to being a healthcare provider in all kinds of ways and a data company and a lot of things surrounding health. But the first thing that people will talk about when the company reports earnings is medical loss ratio, and you're like, "That is not the central issue any more here." The medical loss ratio actually is a short-term thing. If it's higher or lower, it generally corrects itself over the next less than a year because contracts are rewritten every year. Yes, finding the central key driver and keeping your eye on that ball is critical.

Patrick: [00:58:16] It seems like the big theme across our conversation is these big zones of change writ large within a company. That sometimes like maybe the AWS, another good example where when the thing changes, that's where people are slow on the uptake and that's the zone of opportunity.

Steve: [00:58:32] Yeah. And I can't say we've been great at that, but that's exactly right. When there's that inflection point or change ... I remember when Google came public through a Dutch auction thing and I was like, "I hate this structure." We didn't participate in the offering. Then they reported their first quarter, I looked at it. "Oh, oh. Let's go." There are times when that happens. It is not often, but there are times when that happens and you go like, "Okay, I get it now."

Patrick: [00:59:07] Is there any other major thing that's happening in the world that we haven't talked about that you're interested in and think is really important in the business world? Then I want to talk a bit about your philanthropic work and wrap up.

Steve: [00:59:17] There's literally billions of people who 30 years ago did not know really much of anything going on outside their village and were living in poverty. In the last 30 years, most of them now know things that are going on well outside their village and have been lifted out of poverty.

There's bad news in the press every day, but there are fewer people in the world dying from disease, starvation, violence as a percentage of the global population than has ever existed anytime in the history of the world. I think we often sort of lose sight of that when we're micro-focused on ... Some of the things that have caused that to happen across the world have been less good for the US because many jobs that were forcibly done here can now be done other places for less and where people think that less is mana from heaven. I think that the fundamental shift in technology that's kind of enabled most of that, that is the big thing.

Patrick: [01:00:27] How have your personal core motivations morphed over the years? It's kind of my excuse to get an ask about how you formed your philanthropic strategy and views. What has changed about what matters to you personally?

Steve: [01:00:41] I would say not much has changed and what matters to me personally. I mean, matters to me personally, I mean, I guess family and friends come first. I mean, I've never asked myself as explicitly this way, but maybe more explicitly all the time is, what is my highest and best use to the world? If we're here, we should try and make the world somehow better while we're here. What is my highest and best use? I've always thought, "Okay, gee, if I stopped doing this and then became a high school history teacher or whatever, is that really the highest and best use of me?" Because no, probably I would not be nearly as good a high school history teacher as many other high school teachers. I might be impacting 50 kids or something. Fortunately this business, I just pinch myself every day and then we get to do this, we get to go out and meet all kinds of interesting people, learn all kinds of interesting things, understand all kinds of interesting businesses, meet all kinds of leaders and you get to make money while doing it. It's amazing.

My highest and best use for better or for worse is trying to take some of that money and make things better for other people. My wife and I, she kind of focuses on the environment and I focus largely on education and we do a bunch of other things too. More recently, trying to make sure that our democracy stays a democracy. We devote a fair amount of time to that. Sometimes successfully and sometimes less successfully.

Patrick: [01:02:08] When it comes to education, given you've focus there, what have you learned that's valuable for others to understand about inputs and outputs from that system?

Steve: [01:02:17] I have learned that the problem with education in this country is the system and the politics around the system. I've learned a bunch of things by working with a bunch of organizations in this. Then a bunch of the work we've done at Lone Pine Foundation, a lot of it relates to education and has involved a lot of our people here. 30 years ago, we did not know that much about what worked and what didn't work. When I say what worked, I meant taking kids who are two and three years behind in school and not only catching them up, but putting them on a path to success in life. We know now, 30 years later that 30 years ago we had virtually no examples of that. Now we have hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of examples, and we know by and large what it takes to do that. It's not pouring a lot more money. It can be done with the kind of amount of money we spend now. But what is required is for both politics and, I'll call it, embedded structures to change, and that's really hard.

Patrick: [01:03:29] If you were with a group of young, really talented would be equity investment analysts, what advice would you give them early on in their career given everything that you've experienced?

Steve: [01:03:40] I think the most important thing is to get themselves into a organization, it could be public markets, private markets, it doesn't really matter, where they are mentored by people who teach them really good fundamentals. A lot of that is sort of by osmosis. I mean, we don't have-

Patrick: [01:04:04] Sitting in a classroom.

Steve: [01:04:05] Yeah. A lot of it is going and visiting companies with people and working on transactions with people. That has benefited me. I just was very lucky. Each of the places I've worked, which is not many, but I worked with tremendous people. I learned a lot from them. I mean, I used to walk into ... I used to take the 5:48 train from here and then the subway downtown to Goldman Sachs. I would walk on whatever it was, Stone Street looking at 85 Broad Street. I'd look up at 85 Broad Street and it'd be like 10:07 or whatever and I would go, "There are more smart people, good people in that building maybe than in another building in the United States." Probably not totally true, but was directionally true. They were incredible people that I learned a lot from. Tiger, I mean, I learned a lot. They're great people and I learned a lot from not only Julian, but my contemporaries too.

Patrick: [01:05:00] This has been so much fun. I ask everybody that I speak with the same closing question. What is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Steve: [01:05:07] Probably, I would say my wife saying yes to me asking me to marry her. But she kind of knew that was coming. I really always have admired and been thankful for both Joe Ellis at Goldman and Julian Robertson at Tiger giving me the freedom and runway to express myself, advance, do things without ... There can be a tendency to-

Patrick: [01:05:38] Dampen.

Steve: [01:05:39] ... dampen. They both let 1,000 flowers bloom and that enabled me to have freedom to do my best and to learn. I don't know if I describe those as acts of kindness so much, but they were certainly acts of generosity. I think anybody who gets themselves in that kind of situation is lucky.

Patrick: [01:06:00] A wonderful place to close. This has been so much fun. I learned a lot as I expected to. Thank you so much for your time.

Steve: [01:06:04] Thanks, Patrick.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
