
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released August 12th, 2021
Founder's Field Guide
Sameer Shariff - Breaking Language Barriers
Sameer Shariff is the co-founder and CEO of Cambly. We cover the origin story of the business, what Sameer views as the core functions of a two-sided marketplace, and how the team approached scaling a product that was international from day one.

00:00:00
00:54:16
Introduction
Patrick: [00:02:27] My guest today is Sameer Shariff, co-founder and CEO of Cambly. After starting his career at Google, Sameer founded Cambly in 2013 as an on-demand service to learn English. At the touch of a button, Cambly connects its global user base to a one-on-one conversation with an English speaker. During our conversation, we cover the origin story of the business, what Sameer views as the core functions of the two-sided marketplace, and how the team approached to scaling a product that was international from day one. Once you hear Sameer talk, you'll quickly realize the size of Cambly's market opportunity and why it may have been easy to overlook this problem. I hope you enjoy this great conversation with Sameer Shariff.

A Massive Market Hiding in Plain Sight
Patrick: [00:03:08] Sameer, I think the right place to begin what will be a really unique conversation is around this problem space that you're tackling, because almost everyone listening speaks English almost by default. It's not a problem that we think about that we speak English, that we don't speak English and need to. So it's this massive problem hiding in plain sight. Maybe you could begin by just describing how you came across this concept in the first place, and then let's pick it apart as deeply as we can.

Sameer: [00:03:32] Cambly really grew out of our own experiences learning other languages. My co-founder and I both grew up here the US and we went through the school system here and took foreign languages in a traditional classroom environment. And for me personally, I took Spanish. I wasn't great at it. I felt like I wasn't really a languages person. And independent of that, I love to travel. I've been all over the world, I love meeting new people, learning about their lives. And many places I went to, they spoke Spanish. And so what I found is that immersing myself in the environment was a far more effective way to learn the language. And I took one trip in particular to Argentina where I kept finding myself in environments where I was surrounded by people who only spoke Spanish.

And it took an environment like that for me to come out of my shell and practice speaking, and what I found is that I got so much better at the language so quickly. And not just that, it was far more rewarding than it ever was in a classroom environment. My co-founder, Kevin had a really similar experience learning French in school and then going to visit France and spending time there. And we got together around this idea of like, "Why can't we create that experience from home?" We were technologists, we're both former software engineers from Google, so technologists and product people.

We thought, "There's no reason why he shouldn't be able to practice speaking French with a French speaker whenever he wants. I should be able to practice speaking Spanish with the Spanish people whenever I want." There's plenty of people in the world that speak those languages, they just don't happen to live near us, and so it sounded like the type of problem technology could solve. That's how we got started. And I think what we wanted wasn't necessarily a formal class or a formal lesson, what we wanted a regular person to talk to, very similar to what you do when you're traveling, you strike up conversations with people left and right. And that's what we set out to do, we set out to build that product.

And like I said, my co-founder, Kevin wants to learn French, I want to learn Spanish. We looked at the market and we quickly realized that the world wants to learn English, and we decided to focus on that.

Patrick: [00:05:24] Yeah. I was going to say, maybe we could double click a little bit on English. You and your co-founder don't have the problem that you're solving, you grew up speaking English. How did you start to begin to learn the scope of this problem? Maybe you put some numbers or some narrative around why this is so important, what it unlocks if you guys win and do a good job.

Sameer: [00:05:43] That's exactly right. My co-founder and I both grew up speaking English, we never had this problem personally, we never experienced it firsthand. I think we got first exposure to the problem, it came out of that love for travel and really looking around and keeping a global perspective of, what are the important problems to solve in the world? And then really thinking about the world in that case. If you zoom out a little, there's about 7.5 billion people in the world right now, six billion of them don't speak English. In the broadest sense, that is the market. And by the way, on those six billion people, 1.5 billion people are actively trying to learn English right now. And so this is an enormous problem in the world.

There's not a lot of problems that impacting that many people. But what I think is super interesting about this problem is, it's not a problem that the English speaking world really sees at all. English speakers like you and I, we don't just not see the problem personally, but also no one we know has this problem because it's not a coincidence that the people we know and people we talk to also speak English. It's this enormous problem in the world that is largely overlooked by the English-speaking world. What does it mean for someone if they do not speak English?

I think for those of us who speak English, we just don't really know how to think about that. English is very different from every other language. If you can learn English, it unlocks immense opportunity in your life, it unlocks huge economic opportunity, you can get a job you wouldn't have been able to get otherwise, a promotion you wouldn't have been able to get otherwise, you could actually move to a place where you can have a better life. I think access to the information is also a really interesting thing that I think a lot of people don't think about that.

You and I, we use the internet every day, we're used to having information at our fingertips, but what we forget is that the vast majority of the internet is in English. If you don't know English, all of a sudden, the world of information you can play in is much smaller. Even things like this podcast, which has a wealth of really good information if you're trying to start a company or become a really savvy investor, this podcast is in English. And so all of the nuggets of information in this podcast, they feel like they're widely accessible to anyone in the world, but actually, they're accessible only to the people that speak English.

There are loads and loads of examples like that that I think as a non-English speaker, you feel this problems very acutely, but as an English speaker, we just take for granted all of the information and opportunities we have.

Patrick: [00:08:01] Can you walk us through, in the early days, I'm always fascinated by the first motion you take as a business or as an early small group. So you've identified, "Okay, this is a really unique problem that no one's thinking about. The addressable market is 1.5 billion people, that seems worthwhile, something to tackle." What do you do first? So describe what Cambly is, literally what the service does. I think it's convenient to think about it as kind of like a marketplace or a network that connects speakers trying to learn. So just describe the very basics of it. And then go back to day one of, how did you start to tackle this problem?

Sameer: [00:08:33] It's a super simple product and a pretty simple idea. We're a mobile and web app. You open our app, you press a button, and within a few seconds, we connect you to a friendly native English speaker for a video chat. And then you talk to them and you practice your conversational English skills. And yeah, you're exactly right, at its core, it's a marketplace, a two-sided marketplace. On one side, you've got tutors, on the other side, you've got the students. The students are people who are trying to learn English and want to work on the English skills, and then the tutors are native English speakers from all over the world.

We talked about the number of people who were trying to learn English in the world. There also happened to be lots of people that speak English, but yeah, those two populations tend to be geographically far apart. So if you can create a marketplace that connects those groups of people, it creates a huge amount of value on both sides.

Patrick: [00:09:18] One of the things that I'm always fascinated by in marketplaces early on is, I don't know what you want to call it, "aliveness" or something, where you think about the experience from both sides, that if one shows up, you need someone on the other side to be there too, and you need the experience to be good. And I'd love to spend a chunk of our conversation just discussing what you've learned about building marketplaces. Obviously, some of this will be idiosyncratic to you, but a lot of it might be generalizable. So just refer us on the challenges of building a marketplace that feels alive.

Sameer: [00:09:49] I think the way we tackled it and I think a good strategy is to just how to solve one side of the marketplace first, basically. I think "aliveness" is actually a really nice way to describe it. In the earliest days when we were getting started, my co-founder and I were the only two tutors on the platform, and so we would spend our days basically writing code and building the product, and then constantly getting interrupted when someone was calling in to talk to someone from around the world in English. It was actually a great way to get started. I think an interesting aspect of our business is, I think it's a really good idea to talk to your customers in the early days so you really understand their needs and what they're looking for.

And so talking to them was a great opportunity for us. And for them, they were really looking to talk to native English speakers, which we happened to be. And so it was this actually a very symbiotic relationship in the early days of starting the company. And yes, we spent our days like writing code and building the product and talking to our potential customers. We really wanted the service to be on demand, so 24/7 anytime day or night, you press the button and you get a native English speaker. My co-founder and I both lived in San Francisco. We were awake and slept roughly the same hours.

And so it was obviously hard to make an on-demand service with us being the only two people powering the supply side of the marketplace. And so we started to build up the supply side. And to get it alive like you described, we basically effectively had to just pay people to sit around and wait on the off chance that someone called in and wanted to talk to a native English speaker, and we just did that. We were bootstrapped, we were funding the company ourselves in the early days, and we were basically paying people to hang out, paying people out of pocket to just hang out and wait to see if someone called in.

And so in the very early stages of the company, that's how we got the place started. And then what we really wanted to do is deliver on the experience we were hoping to deliver on. And when you're really small, it doesn't take a whole lot in order to deliver on that, you just need someone available to talk to, in our case.

Technical Challenges
Patrick: [00:11:43] The people are one part of this, the technology is another. I have to imagine there's some interesting technical challenges that you had to solve to be able to instantly connect people in the way that you do with high fidelity, and if it's about language, you need the voice to be clear, and all these things. Talk us through the interesting technical challenges and maybe what the enabling technologies are for a company like yours. Like how long ago would this have been impossible to build, and what's changed?

Sameer: [00:12:08] The demand for English has been there for awhile, it's growing for sure. But I think the smartphone really unlocked a lot of new opportunities in this space and domain. The idea of being able to instantly video chat with someone on the opposite side of the world, not too long ago, that wasn't really a thing that was easy or accessible to everyone. And it was really the advent of the smartphone, this basically connected device with a front-facing camera that's perfect for video chat. That I think really unlocked this market of, I can get help from someone on the opposite side of the world over video chat.

And there's a lot of businesses that have emerged in that space. And obviously, we've been working in language education and English education specifically. But, what do you need, the ingredients you need are fast internet, video chat enabled devices in order to create this marketplace. And so, I think that opened up a lot of opportunity in the broad space.

Patrick: [00:13:02] How do you decide who to focus on first within that sub category of 1.5 billion people trying to learn? Is it like absolute beginners? Is it people that are further along in the journey? How did you figure out where the sweet spot might be? Because quality control seems like a huge problem, both on the tutor side and on the other side, if a tutor is great, but the person barely speaks English and they don't speak the other person's native tongue, how do you manage stuff like this? This seems like a million problems that you'd have to manage. I'd love to hear how you tackled all that.

Sameer: [00:13:28] I think of it actually parallel to like a service like Lyft or Uber where you've got the super simple app, but you press the button and then this like magical thing happens, a car pulls up in front of you, and there's a lot happening behind the scenes in order to deliver them that experience. Cambly's really similar. You press a button and then instantly you're like talking to one-on-one with a native English speaker, potentially on the other side of the world from you. We had to build a lot of technology to, for example, predict demand, like make sure you always have enough supply to fulfill whatever demand you have any hour of any day.

Coming back to your question about what demographic do you focus on with a service like this, when we looked at language learning in general and English education more specifically, there were a lot of solutions out there for learning languages. Many of them, broadly there was brick and mortar schools that had traditional classroom environment, like I described earlier. And then there's a lot of software based tools that helped you get started, learn your first few words, learn how to conjugate some verbs and put together a simple sentence. But what we found is, those services would only take you so far. You'd learn some fundamentals of languages, but you'd never get to actually fluency.

And I think if you were to tell me, "Hey, like I really want to learn French," your goal is not to learn a few words of French, your goal is to be able to interact with a French person in a real time environment. But I think likely way you'd approach that is to do everything but actually interacting with that French person. And it's the same thing with learning English, people would study English for years and years, but never actually practice speaking it or the native speaker. And it's almost silly to say this, but if your goal is to get really good at something and you never do that thing, it's not going to work.

And it's not that people didn't recognize this, I think the issue was more that it's much easier to go pick up a workbook or a book and study from that than it is to snap your fingers and have an English speaker in front of you. And that's what we realized this is a hole in the language learning process, and so we set up to solve that.

Patrick: [00:15:27] Another thing that fascinates me because your business is all about on demand, streaming, exactly the thing you want that you couldn't get before because of technology constraints but now you can, is how you map that onto a unique business model. I assume that people might sometimes stand in line at the store and talk for five minutes on the phone and sometimes they might want to talk for an hour and that it's totally random how long they want to talk and therefore pricing and the way that you share economics and structure part of the business with the two sides of the marketplace is really intriguing.

Can you tell us just what you've learned there? What might be surprising? How it works? I'm just fascinated by this part of the problem.

Sameer: [00:16:04] We have an interesting business model, an interesting and unusual business model. On the student side of the platform, people subscribe to the service and they get some amount of usage of Cambly. Say you pay 100 bucks a month and you get 15 minutes a day daily. And it's use it or lose it, and so what that does is it encourages you, you've already paid for it, you might as well use it. Baked into the business model is, we're teaching our customers how to use the product. It's going to be much more effective for you to learn a language if you spend 15 minutes a day practicing it than it is if you binge and spend three hours once every two weeks.

Regularity and daily practice is super important, and that's how you're going to develop the skill. And so we baked that into the way the business model is structured. The tutor side, you get paid to talk to students. And so for all the time you speaking with students, you get a fixed rate there. So it's a interesting marketplace because it decouples the way we like collect revenue and then pay it out.

Patrick: [00:17:05] What mistakes have you made in the business model to date? What have you learned doesn't work?

Sameer: [00:17:10] We've tried various models in terms of the marketplace there, and we made loads of mistakes over the years. I guess, zooming in on that piece in particular, we had a pay-as-you-go model at some point in the early days. I think the challenge there is, one, I think it doesn't tell you how to use the product, it doesn't tell you that regularity in daily practice is really important. And I think the other thing is, if you have ever been on a long distance phone call and you're thinking, "This is costing me X cents a minute," it makes you evaluate whether every minute is worth it.

And we wanted to create this more of what I would call like a season pass mentality of like, okay, you've committed to do this thing, it's important for you. Now go and use it. There's no incremental cost of using the service. And so I think it aligns better with how we want our students behave, and I think it also encourages them to actually use the product, and that's what we want. Ultimately, we really want a product that people don't just pay for, but they go and actually use it because that's how they're going to improve their English.

Patrick: [00:18:09] Can you talk a bit about, since what you're facilitating ultimately is a person to person conversation, you can't be snooping on all of these conversations, how you handle bad actors. There must be people that are evil or bad or do something wrong on either side of the platform. I imagine we're going to have more and more of these massive human-to-human networks in the future, what you've learned about solving this problem might be really interesting to others. So how do you do it?

Sameer: [00:18:36] And so we have moderation tools in place. As one of the features to our students, we record conversations and they can go and watch them and review the discussions they've had. And if a conversation gets flagged, which can moderate and figure out what happened and where did it go wrong. These are few and far between, but anytime you're running a large marketplace at scale, you're going to have examples of that. And so, yeah, we take it super seriously. We want to create a really safe environment for both sides of the marketplace. And so that's something that we have a hand in and we moderate to make sure that the activity happening on the platform is indeed English education.

Patrick: [00:19:15] Are there any classes of problems that you think are general, will see over and over again? Whether you call it moderation or whatever you want to call it, how do you think about this as like a general purpose problem of the internet?

Sameer: [00:19:27] Moderation is a complex topic. What's interesting and unique about our marketplace specifically is the types of connections that are happening. Most of the connections or many of the connections on the internet are you interacting with people you know in real life, maybe on Facebook or Instagram or so forth, social network based platforms. What's interesting about Cambly is, you're meeting people you don't know, and not just people you don't know, but people who are living on the opposite side of the globe from you, have a very different culture and life experience that they bring.

And so I think one of the challenges, but also one of the amazing benefits of a platform like Cambly is these international connections you make. You make these human-to-human connection for people who have very different lives. You can imagine that there are sometimes challenges and disagreements that come up from that, but I would say the vast majority of what we see there is just a really incredible cultural exchange. Saudi Arabia is actually a pretty big market for us, and a lot of our tutors are American. And so for a while now, we've had loads and loads of Americans talking to people in Saudi Arabia. And it's this one-on-one conversation.

If you think about the ways you learn about various parts of the world, it's largely filtered through the media and how the media portrays that. I think what's cool about Cambly is we short circuit that and just connect person to person, citizen to citizen. And what we hear over and over again, people are more similar than they are different, in a lot of ways, like movies, like music, have their favorite sports they like to watch. There's a ton of similarities, and I think making these humans-to- human connections, I think there's a lot of really cool benefits that come from that as well. And we set up to help people learn English, but I think it's a really cool artifact of the type of marketplace we've built.

Four Core Functions of a Marketplace
Patrick: [00:21:04] One of the models I always try to think about for marketplaces is just these four core functions. So we talked about the first, which is setting rules and standards. It's a fairly simple, I'll call it a protocol. You're talking to another person, everyone can understand that and some of the moderation stuff. The second is core tools or services, pieces of the technology, there's matchmaking, you've got to pair people up. And there's audience building, you've got to build supply and demand through time. And I'd love to ask, in each of those four categories, just a couple extra questions, because I just think those are neat lenses through which...

And I'd be curious if you would frame it as those four, if there's other major categories that you would list as responsibilities of the platform or the business, maybe we can do that at the end. So maybe I'll start with core tools and services, the technology itself. It's interesting for me to think about the product roadmap for you. You've got a FaceTime-like screen you're speaking to the person, it's contained in that core action. How do you think about future tools and servicing that will make this experience better for both sides of the model?

Sameer: [00:22:03] Yeah. The atomic unit or core part of the experience is just this video chat, similar to FaceTime. What we've done over the years is layered on a bunch of other technology on top of that, things like being able to exchange messages back and forth and potentially translate them, things like maintaining a profile for students that contains some of their goals or information that helps you have the most productive session you can. We talked a bunch about that this totally open conversational English that happens in the platform, but some of our students really want more structure, and so we've added curriculum and courses that people can enroll in and follow along with.

We have a very diverse set of customers in terms of where they're coming from and why they're learning English, and so we've had to build courses around those needs. For example, business English is a big category. You may not just be trying to learn everyday English so you can order food at a restaurant, but if you're trying to learn English for some professional setting, then zooming in on the specific language and terminology you need to use for that role is super important. I won't jump ahead into your matching piece, but there's a lot of connections, the matching of student-tutor there as well. We've layered on a bunch of technology to make the experience as smooth and seamless for both sides and is effective that learning and teaching English beyond just a FaceTime screen.

Patrick: [00:23:21] I always loved that exercise, Airbnb's 11-Star experience where they keep layering on almost like ridiculous features. So they're 11 stars, you're flying a helicopter with champagne, you parachute into the hotel or whatever. What does that exercise feel like for you? So if you look out 10 years or something and put your ridiculous hat on, what is like the 11 star version of this experience, do you think that might be possible in the future but it isn't yet?

Sameer: [00:23:47] I would have to jump into some of the matching stuff now because you're teeing me up for it.

Patrick: [00:23:53] Do it. No rules.

Sameer: [00:23:53] Ultimately, what we want to do is we want to serve as many of those 1.5 or six billion people that don't know English as possible, and we want to deliver an incredible English education experience for them that helps them learn as quickly as possible. And so I think the core metric there is, how fast is someone learning English, and specifically the English they need and want for their lives? If I start to dream a bit of like, what does that six-star, seven-star, 10-star experience look like, when we started this company, the value we offered is, "We're going to get you a friendly native English speaker instantly." And that was the initial value prop.

But the vision and the dream was always, we're not just going to get you a friendly native English speaker, we're going to get you like perfect person for you. So maybe they share your interests, your personality, style, your occupation, which we touched on earlier. So we're going to get you the perfect match, your English speaking counterpart, if you will, and give you this really personalized match with a tutor and give you this really personalized content and curriculum that you're going to go over. That I think is the broad dimensions in which I think the experience can go from five star and up and beyond from there.

Obviously, there's a lot it takes to deliver on that experience. There are a lot of reasons why people are learning English, and so the cardinality, that space is big. We talked about the matching piece as well, and also matching two people, matching two people to create this perfect match. It takes a lot of sale to be able to do that. And so we're far, far better at that today than we were a few years years ago, but we'll be much, much better at it in the coming years. It's not just like a matching algorithm you need, you actually need enough scale in order to deliver on really good matches and you need enough liquidity, not overall in your community, but within each vertical.

And so there's a lot of really interesting marketplace matching pieces there. I don't know if you've heard of a term called Bloom's Two Sigma Problem, but it's a study that was done decades ago that basically compared one-on-one tutoring to learning in a classroom environment. What the study found is that the educational outcomes from one-on-one tutoring were far, far better than a classroom environment. To quantify that, the two sigmas is two deviations better. This was done decades ago, it was this interesting study, but it was academic at the time, because it was like, how do you actually learn from that?

Patrick: [00:26:16] What do you do about it? Yeah, yeah.

Sameer: [00:26:17] What do you do about that? What we're doing is, we're actually taking that model and we're scaling it to a level that it hasn't gotten to before. We are one of the largest, if not maybe the largest experiments that exists in the world of that. And I think what's really powerful about one-on-one is this personalization. I think back to the times that I've learned things the fastest, it's always a one-on-one conversation with someone who knows far more about the topic than I do. And the reason for that is simple if you think about it. We don't waste any time talking about stuff I already know.

You're always at the fringe, at the edge of your knowledge, and you can hang out in that zone, and that's how you maximize the rate at which you learn. And yeah, I think it's something that's unique about one-on-one.

Patrick: [00:26:59] I think some large percentage of what I've learned in my life is from this podcast, people have heard me do it, and it is the one-on-one power that I get to control it and go, "Well, I don't know stuff. I'm not just like some generic, broad conversation, it's very specific to me, which makes me wonder, how much of what you're building is applicable far beyond learning languages, and instead in any one-on-one learning setting, if you're capturing the right legible information about people and what they want, do you have broader ambitions to go that way eventually? Or is the problem you're on now too big to even think about that just yet?

Sameer: [00:27:33] It's interesting, I definitely have thought about that a lot, described earlier, it's like, how can someone on the other side of the world help you over video chat? And that's a pretty broad traumatization of the space. And honestly, I almost thought about that more in the early days than I do now because I think as I've dug deeper into language education, and more specifically English education, I've recognized the scope of the problem. We've done really well and the company has grown really fast and we've scaled a ton over the years, but when you think about the size of the market, the six billion people that have done the English and the 1.5 billion that are trying to learn it right now, we are stuck in that market.

And so we're right now just really focused on scaling that up and then serving more of those English learners. But I think the technology and the product absolutely extends to other arenas. And there's other companies out there that have zoomed in certain categories like getting a doctor on demand, for example, over video chat. And yeah, you can pick your vertical, but we're really excited about English education.

Patrick: [00:28:33] Just in investing, the expert networks are huge, really profitable businesses. I think you can see this one-on-one connection being powerful just about anywhere. I have to ask more about the matchmaking, because in any of these one-on-one context, this would be powerful knowledge or set of tools, how do you approach this problem technically? How do you start to set yourself up for success so that that degree or quality of personalization and match can get better as you achieve more scale? What are the dimensions that matter here for matchmaking in your opinion?

Sameer: [00:29:01] I think what's interesting about people is given about who are the people that you get along with in your life and why, I think we're complex creatures and there's lots of subtleties to human-to-human interactions. And I think all of those applies matchmaking service like Cambly as well. I think there are some prominent ones, some of the ones I listed like personality, style, interests. I think occupation is a super interesting one, and I think particularly for the arena that we're in where a lot of people who use Cambly are using it for professional reasons.

We have a lot of young professionals using the service and that's a dimension that there are lots of different occupations out there. It's like a pretty high cardinality space. And so it takes a lot of scale to actually get a match in a meaningful way, even just that single dimension. In the early days, a lot of the matching came from just allowing the students to explore the community too, because we have them, preview, watch intro videos, read profiles, find the right tutor for themselves. We've been doing a lot of work now to hold your hand a bit more through that process and facilitate more of that match ourselves.

And so what do you need to do to that is effectively collect structured data on both sides of the marketplace so then you can match in some of those dimensions. It's a complex problem because matching two people is complicated on its own. The student is potentially excited to have a conversation right now, there's also a temporal component, can we deliver this perfect match to you? Not only do we have the perfect match in the marketplace-

Patrick: [00:30:28] You've got 10 of them in each time zone.

Sameer: [00:30:30] Exactly. So we deliver one to you right now, and so the scale you need, I think is surprising, I think that to be able to actually match in all those dimensions, including time.

Patrick: [00:30:40] Yeah. The last category of the four is audience building, which is how do you get first of all, supply and demand to hear about your company, and then second to get to the bottom of the funnel and actively using it? How do you think about audience building strategies to make this thing really thrive and scale?

Sameer: [00:30:56] In the early days, they did a bunch of scrappy things just to get the marketplace off the ground, posted at job boards and so forth, giving that initial cohort of tutors. A lot of our students from the early days came through App Store discovery and word of mouth. We had this really amazing wow moment where you download this app, you press the button and if somebody were talking to a native English speaker and I think it was that you can flow your customer's mind in the first few seconds of using the service. I think there's a lot of value you get out of that.

I remember actually back in the days when my co-founder, Kevin and I were tutoring, I talked to a student in Brazil that has stuck with me since then where she told me, I asked him, "How did you learn English?" And he said, "I learned it from basically like music and movies. No one I know, no one in my family, none of my friends, nobody speaks English." And I think what was interesting about that story is, I thought about this kid who had literally never met a native English speaker before, and then he stumbled across this app, he press the button, within a few seconds, a native English speaker turns out, he's gone from never meeting a native English speaker in his life to quite literally having an American in his pocket anytime he wants.

And that disparity in the before and after, that wow experience, I think it caused a lot of people to share that experience. And so in the early days, a lot of them, and we still benefit from word of mouth. I think what's been interesting about our businesses, we've had to be really international from day one, we were a couple of former software engineers building a product in San Francisco, but we were building a product for basically everyone who was not like us, people who were everywhere, but where we were. What we had to learn pretty early on is how do we go and market to Korea and Japan and Brazil?

I think one of the things we've done is we've built out basically a lot of that international experience within the team. We hired country managers that initially were one man and one woman teams to launch a market and have since built out teams there. And that's been really effective for us to figure out, what are the unique ways you grow in each market? And I think one thing I actually I'm pretty proud of is if you go to Saudi Arabia and you ask our customers about Cambly, they think we're a Saudi Arabian company. If you go to Korea and you ask the customers there, they think we're a Korean company.

I think it's a testament to the level of localization we've done the where it's not just the app or the website, the customer support, it's the marketing. Every touch point is not just in the right language, but culturally aware, talking about the things that are relevant to you. And so we have to go global and think really internationally from day one. And we've built a really international team as part of that. And so I think for me personally, it's really fun because we've got this, I told you I love to travel, and I love to learn about people from different parts of the world. And the good fortune I get to not just do that through our customers, which are again to all over the globe, but also through the team, that's been super fun as well.

International from Day One
Patrick: [00:33:49] This seems like an area maybe to dig in because it sounds completely fascinating, and this is going to be something that more and more businesses have to do going forward. Everything's going to be more international, more global, work remote, all these trends everyone's aware of. So let's say you're opening a new market for the first time and it's fairly dissimilar from any market you've opened thus far, what have you learned about that playbook?

Does it start with a GM and then you just delegate responsibility? And even if so, what are the sequences or steps that that person goes through that you've learned to really hone that make what you just described possible that to a Korean, it feels like a Korean company? Walk us through the playbook here, it sounds fascinating.

Sameer: [00:34:24] Our strategy has been to start with that GM, and we've learned over time what the right profile for someone who's going to be really successful there is.

Patrick: [00:34:34] What is that just out of curiosity? What's that profile?

Sameer: [00:34:36] We give our GMs a ton of ownership and we're pretty highly analytical team. And so I jokingly talk about how the languages at Cambly, the company are English and math. We've learned that you want someone who's like scrappy entrepreneurial, highly analytical. I think from a culture fit standpoint, obviously look for someone who fits in well with the team, but there's a few of these skills. And obviously, you want them then to be able to grow into a manager and leader because the moment they have success in the market, they want to start to build out a team.

And so I think it was easy to miss a few of those things in the early days, but we've honed in on what works really well. And so we start with a single person, and they go through the full experience for our student and make it really highly localized. That's one of the first things they do. Then they start to build the brand of a business. And it's not too dissimilar from starting a new company. I often describe it to them. You're launching a company in Brazil, you've got the benefit of a great product including the supply side of the marketplace, like a tutor community you can piggyback off of, but go find your first few customers.

Patrick: [00:35:40] It's almost like a franchise or something. Like a franchising model.

Sameer: [00:35:44] Yeah. They starts there, pretty similar to how it is when you're getting started at a company, they do a bunch of scrappy things to just of get their first few customers in the door and get the engine going, and then scale up from there. And so I think it's been a really interesting and fun job. And I think for the right person that works out really well both ways.

Patrick: [00:36:02] Is there anything surprising you've learned about the markets where this works best? And I'm also curious whether you're roughly as successful in some new market in some part of the world as in most others may be tough as you scale by population size or core market size or something, but is there anything surprising you've learned there about the distribution of your clientele around the globe? Or look like a population map of the countries in which you've tried to have success?

Sameer: [00:36:28] There's immense demand for English all over the world. It varies as well. There are certain countries where people are even more eager to learn English, and in some cases it's because they're looking for new opportunities. I think a lot of the countries we've succeeded in are like... It's been a mix. Each stage I think pretty well developed countries also had a lot of success in more developing regions. In some ways it's the population of the world, but you're have to then layer on top of that, the need for learning English and how well people speak English in that market.

And then also purchasing power is pretty important as well because Cambly is not super cheap. You're paying to talk one-on-one with an English speaker, often an American, and so there's a cost restriction as well, that layers into that map as well.

Boss Battles, Lessons Learned, and Advice
Patrick: [00:37:16] If you think about, I love thinking about these business stories as like a series of challenges you have to overcome, I always call them boss battles because I was such a video game fan when I was young. What are the biggest boss battles that you've faced as a business? And maybe tell us one, two, three of them. In each case, what the major lesson was that you learned from conquering some boss along the way?

Sameer: [00:37:37] I'm a big fan of launch and iterate strategy. And so we put a product out there when it was pretty rough and had to iterate a bunch in order to get something that was actually valuable and worked. And so I don't know if I can pinpoint the exact day in which we went from like a product that wasn't working to a product that's working, but I think that's the most core fundamental first boss you have to beat, I think anytime you're building a technology company. I think the next phase after that is actually now like, "Okay, you've got a thing that works well, how do you get people to use it?"

I think figuring out how to market and scale our service, I think it was like I said, uniquely challenging just because of the international nature of our business and our customer base. I think figuring out how to crack that nut. And a lot of that came down to the lessons there was around building, hiring in that local expertise into the team. We were two software engineers, we built this product, and literally employee number one at Cambly was a Korea country manager. So it's kind of an odd makeup of a three-person team, two ex-Google software engineers and a Korea country manager.

But for the space we were in, it made a lot of sense. And I remember when we were thinking through that higher, when you're building out a team, you often want to like layer in the skills that you are missing, fill in the gaps and what you can do. And I remember thinking like, "This is a case where I could spend the next 10 years trying to learn the Korean language and learn about Korean culture and still not be anywhere close to someone who grew up there." And so it seemed like a great thing to fill in a gap and hire for. And we started there, but we've hired a lot of country managers since then.

I think that almost organizational structure and approach to go to market, I think has been a fundamental building block in which we discovered all sorts of different barking channels and so forth. And so I think that was a big breakthrough for us as well. Raising money for the company, we had challenges along the way for that, I think, largely because like I said, it was not a problem that people saw every day and understood super well. And so I think we as a company, we had to hit, I think, bigger and more challenging milestones in order to get that next round and then an equivalent company that was working in a different space.

And those are challenging bosses to talk, but I also think lack of capital, it can often be a strength. We've built a really lean team that's scaled the big business and we've done it with like very little capital. And we went out to raise various rounds and be really successful in that realm, but we were always in a position where we didn't necessarily need to do that. I think that one, maybe it's particularly memorable because although it was painful and challenging at the time, I think it set us on a track and a trajectory that puts the company in a really good position going forward.

Patrick: [00:40:20] What advice would you give to people raising money, given that it was challenging for you? I'm sure you learned a lot of lessons in that process. Any advice you'd give to founders that are in a similar challenging state?

Sameer: [00:40:29] If you're working in a space, in a business where you can choose your own destiny and you can get to cashflow positive, and it's your fundraising conversation are a lot more fun and productive, not all businesses work that way, but I think the more traction you can have, the more flexibility you can have in terms of when you raise, I think puts you in a really good position. I think every time I've fundraised for Cambly, it's gone very much in one of two ways, either it's gone super smoothly and really well and gotten them fast or it's been long and painful and dragged out.

And I think having the luxury of a cutoff when it's not working and then go back to it, I think is really beneficial. And ultimately, investing with smart people, they want strong businesses. And so if you can make your business stronger and make so that your business needs less capital or is less dependent on external funding, that's just going to be a better business. And so the irony is that the less you need the money, the easier it'll be to raise. And so I'm always a fan of being lean, focusing a lot on just growing the business and keeping your head down and raising when it's easy not when it's hard.

Patrick: [00:41:35] If you look back to day one, that day of incorporation for Cambly through to today, how have you personally changed the most?

Sameer: [00:41:43] It's been an amazing journey and lots of learning along the way. In the very early days, I mentioned my co-founder and I were building the product, and we were personally doing all of the tutoring that happens on Cambly. We've scaled the business a ton since then, we now do basically over a year of one-on-one tutoring every single day. Think back to those early days of when we got started, we were personally delivering on every piece of value. We've built a big marketplace now and the impact we're having is quite large.

I think there's opportunity is far, far larger. We have a lot more ahead of us and behind us, but we have we've come a really long way. My role obviously has changed a lot in that journey. I started out as a software engineer and a product person, and we would fill in and do the other things that business needed as we went. And I had never raised money before, I'd never built a team before, I'd never even managed before. And so it's been a lot of learning along the way. I've worn a lot of different hats. I didn't know anything about finance, for example, and I've learned a bunch about that.

I've learned how to pitch the company effectively, how to raise money. My role has gone from doing a lot of the work myself to focusing less on product building and more on company building. And that's been super interesting, but also challenging transition, especially having an engineering training, being used to building the things yourself and getting your hands dirty, it's been a transition to figure out how do you take a step back and focus on less about building, shipping code or building a product, but more about building the right team to then do all the things you need.

And a lot of personal scaling, a lot of letting go of things I used to do before, a lot of thinking about how to talk about the mission of the company in order to attract the right investors, attract the right people to join the team. It's been a pretty big shift, but also we've been working on it for a while. So a lot of those changes have happened gradually. And I think part of the fun of doing this is your job is ever evolving, and I think that's what I'm for. So it's been a lot of fun.

Patrick: [00:43:35] Any insights you can share with us on that idea of letting go and managing others versus doing the work yourself? Anything that made that transition, which sounds hard, smoother, or better for you, or you've just found to be effective as you shift to thinking about company building and managing versus product building and coding?

Sameer: [00:43:53] I think the letting go can be hard, especially if you've been doing something for a while, but it's super important, I think to get the like, one you'll hire people who are much better at doing that thing than you are. And so that's great. I think the more you can give those folks full ownership and autonomy, whatever they're taking over, the better. And sometimes that's easy. I think in the case of the GMs we hired, I didn't know anything about the country, I was in a marketing expert, it was natural for me to say like, "Here's the high level goal that you want to tackle, go for it."

And I think as a result of that, that org has done really well. I think it's harder when it's something you actually have deep expertise on yourself, but I think the lessons are still the same, it's still really important that you give people ownership and autonomy. What you don't want is to hire people where you're still overseeing all the work and still giving all of the direction on what to do and then they're executing, because that takes a ton of cognitive load for you. It's not as fun for you and it's not as fun for them. And I think what you want is people who can come in and really take a high level of ownership.

You can talk about the goals and strategy at a high level, especially when it's in a domain that you know really well, I think it's really tempting to jump in and give lots of opinions. And maybe you can think about it for a while, so you think you know best. But I think it's really dangerous to do that if you're trying to build a team, a robust team that can stand on its own two feet.

Patrick: [00:45:17] I'm a big fan of collaborative learning, and it sounds like this autonomy thing and delegation, you've embraced that big time. If you think outside the company, so you learn a lot from your GMs, are there other companies or even one company just to make it fun that you've learned the most from watching them build?

Sameer: [00:45:35] If I had to pick one, we've followed Airbnb story for a long time. We did Y Combinator back in 2014, they had done it a few years before us. And I remember there was a lot of parallels between our story as we were going through Y Combinator, and theirs have been similar about new scale, similar skepticism about what we were working on. And I remember Paul Graham making that comparison a few times during our course there. And what's interesting about them is they're this international cross border marketplace creating a new behavior.

You'll probably remember the days when sleeping on someone's guestroom or something was considered weird, and obviously, Airbnb has managed to normalize that. In the same way, there was a lot of skepticism about what we were building, the idea that people would pay to just talk to a friendly native English speaker, that was a novel idea, that was a category that we created when we started Cambly. Obviously, we've won some people over to that idea, but back then it was pretty strange. And I think Airbnb business is a super interesting company as well.

We've just taken a lot of inspiration for how they've built their team, how they've scaled. So I think that's probably the one that comes to mind. We've spoken with the founders there before and gotten some inspiration from them, maybe in particular, Airbnb has been involved in the company. Another person and company that comes to mind is Katrina Lake at Stitch Fix. I got to know her more recently, but I heard her speak years ago. And then similar story in terms of challenges raising money. I think she raised something like 50 or $60 million before the IPO in the lifetime of the company up before the IPO.

And a lot of that I think resonated with our early days at the company. I think she's really, really smart around building the right team. And so I've gotten to spend some time with her as well. And she's another real role model and mentor I would consider. But I think I've learned from her journey and tried to emulate.

Patrick: [00:47:25] She's one of my all-time favorite guests on the show too, just a total force and incredible early recruiter. She just was able to win over some monster senior hires at the start with basically nothing, and incredibly impressive person. Sameer, this has been so much fun. I love the problem space. It's so obvious after you hear it, but never thought about it before, since I've never had the problem. Obviously, I hope you're successful. It just seems like it'd be something that would provide a lot of opportunity for those that use the service. So excited to keep watching your journey from here.

I ask the same closing question of everybody. What is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Sameer: [00:48:02] I'd have to go with my parents. I'm a recent parent now as well, we have one and a half-year-old now and all the opportunities I've had in my life, I think it stems from my parents, both the sacrifices they made in their lives. They immigrated here right around when I was born. And this journey I've been on, being able to start a company and take this path, it's obviously a high-risk path, I don't think I wouldn't have necessarily been able to do it without a safety net. And I think back to my parents in their lives and the fact that they weren't able to take those kinds of risks in their lives because they had to provide an opportunity to me.

And I've always appreciated them a ton, but I think being a new parent now, I appreciate them much, and I hope to be half as good parents as they are. So I think when you say kindness, that's probably the most obvious and probably biggest one that comes to mind.

Patrick: [00:48:46] Oh, wonderful. And not uncommon answer, the sacrifices that parents make for their kids. Awesome place to end the conversation. Sameer, thank you so much for your time.

Sameer: [00:48:54] Yeah. Thanks for having me.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
