
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released April 25th, 2022
Invest Like the Best
Dmitry Balyasny - Building a Better Model
Dmitry Balyasny is the Managing Partner and CIO of Balyasny Asset Management. We cover the origin story of his unique multi-strategy firm, the common traits that great portfolio managers share, and how to incentivize talented investors.

00:00:00
01:12:32
Introduction
[00:02:29] Patrick: My guest today is Dmitry Balyasny. Dmitry is the managing partner and CIO of Balyasny Asset Management, otherwise known as BAM. BAM runs a multi-strategy multi-PM model that aims to produce consistent, absolute returns. Since its founding in 2001, it has produced only one negative year and become one of the largest firms of its kind. Please enjoy my conversation with Dmitry Balyasny.

BAM's Origins and Differentiating Characteristics
[00:02:53] Patrick: So, Dmitry, this is my first opportunity to talk to somebody that runs an investment firm structured and built like yours. There's lots of names for these. I think the original name was sort of the platform model, multi-strat, pod shop, there's all these names that float around the professional investing community and yours is one of the largest. Maybe you can just begin by giving me a little bit of the origin story of the firm. And I always love telling these stories in sort of chapter headers, like what you view in hindsight as the key phases of the evolution of the firm. Because I know you focus both not just on investing, but also on building the firm. So, give us that origin story with a few of those key way points along the way.

[00:03:30] Dmitry: First of all, thanks for having me on, real pleasure. I've enjoyed the podcast over the years. So, it's a honor to be here. Origins go back to my origins as a trader and thinking about how to build out business around trading. So, when I started in the business, I started as a broker while going to school, but I really wanted to trade. But I was really got awful at trading and I was losing all the profits that I was generating as a broker and commissions I was generating in my own personal trading, to such an extent that I went broke when I was 23 and really figured out I needed somebody to show me what I was supposed to be doing. So, I applied to lots of trading firms and I was hired into the Schonfeld proprietary trading firm training program. And it was really a good opportunity to learn some structure, which was inherently missing in my trading. So, there was a good opportunity to learn from guys who had been successful for a long time. It was an open environment where you could talk to people and just less of a formal program, but more where you can pick stuff up and people were open to talking about what they did. So, I learned a little bit about money management, timing, discipline, risk management, and those things are all just as important as the stock selection or investment selection piece. Even after doing that for a while first year there, my total income was zero. Thankfully, they bought us lunch, so we didn't starve. I started making money pretty consistently.

To go back to your original question. It was foundational for me seeing the way the firm was structured, where there were lots of different traders with lots of different methods and specialties and styles. The time when I started was about 100-something traders, and by the time I spun out to start my own firm, I think it was about seven years later, there were over 1,000 traders. I grew up with the mentality of it makes sense to have lots of different types of risk-takers, because you have less correlation, you could attack different areas, the markets, and have specialists in different areas. So, it always made sense to me. The other thing I did at the time after having some success trading was I had the opportunity to help manage our internal fund-to-funds portfolio, which invested in different hedge funds just with our own personal capital. So, that was also really helpful seeing how different firms were structured and who stood the test of time and who tended to have lots of volatility in both their trading and their businesses.

Doing that for a long time, it really further cemented my initial belief, because the firms that we were invested with 10 years later, almost in all cases, were variations of a multi-manager model, where you have different risk-takers, different specialties, different styles within the same firm. Those firms tended to be much more durable over time, unless you were scalable. Whereas the firms that were structured around an individual risk-taker, even if he was fantastic, they had lots of volatility over time. And in some cases, that paid for itself, and some cases it didn't. But when I was launching BAM, and thinking about the type of business we wanted to build, we very much wanted to build a really enduring, scalable, institutional business that would do well regardless if I was trading while we're having a good year or not having a good year.

[00:06:43] Patrick: So, there's something very firm over fun to use a phrase that pops up here and again, where for this to be successful, you obviously have to do a lot of things well, you need great risk management, you need amazing recruiting, you need to be really good at incentives and thinking about holistically a portfolio level versus just your own book. These are probably very hard things. Each of them that you try to constantly get better at over time. How would you describe the state of this platform model today? What differentiates good from great in the world of platform hedge funds in 2022, in your view?

[00:07:17] Dmitry: Just thinking about the industry, I kind of never understood why the hedge fund industry needed 10,000 hedge funds just from a individual wanting to hang up a shingle and try their luck. Obviously, the economics in a lot of cases make sense to try that. But certainly they used to, it's much harder today. But from an institutional investor perspective, the last thing you want is 10,000 options. So, I always thought the industry would consolidate over time and that's really accelerated over the last decade, post '08, I would say even the last three, four years that's accelerated again. I always thought it would look more like the private equity industry at maturity, where you have a handful of dominant firms that generate most of institutional alpha at scale. And they have a lot of different offerings and a lot of different structure and a lot of investment talent. And then, you have a larger number of specialized firms that tend to be smaller, but could be very good in different niche strategies, but you don't need 10,000 of them, but maybe you need a few hundred. So, in the private equity equivalent, it might be somebody doing middle market energy deals, the hedge fund equivalent of that could be somebody in a particular sector of a particular geography. I think that's where the world has been heading.

In terms of how to get there, it's a very difficult model to execute well. And you can kind of see that by just how few firms have been successful. The folks that we competed with when we started are pretty much the same folks we compete with today. The number of institutional quality, enduring business models in this space, you can really count on one hand. And for the most part, they've been there for 20 years or in some cases longer. So, why is that? Because to your question, you do have to get a lot of things right. It starts with the mentality of the founders and the management, being a good investor and being a good trader doesn't necessarily make you good at allocating risk or managing other people's risk than hiring other risk-takers. And in many cases, it's actually counterproductive. If somebody's fantastic risk-taker, it's kind of like Michael Jordan wanted to pass the ball, it took a long time before he was comfortable passing the ball, but then they became really good.

It's kind of the same thing with hedge funds. It's a huge shift from somebody to go to a model that's centered around a particular investment process and a particular person, or one team to having, in our case, we have 125 teams. So, it starts with that mentality and really wanting to do that and buy into that and be comfortable allocating risk to people, which I started doing within my trading group 25 years ago at small scale. But beyond that, once you're comfortable with that, then you really need to figure out what is going to be your competitive advantage? How do you get top talent to come work with you? What are you going to offer them in terms of economics and infrastructure and capital and investment intelligence, et cetera? And then, once you have that nexus, it's like, "Okay, how do you actually get everybody to work together? How do you develop people? And how do you manage at scale?" So, these are all different challenges that you run into over time that makes it a tough model to build out.

Outperforming with Multiple Investing Groups and Strategies
[00:10:25] Patrick: Maybe you can just describe in some detail exactly how a firm like this multi-strategy, multi-investor group works in practice. So, if there's, let's just say, a pile of institutional or LP capital that's going into the firm to be managed by BAM, just describe the key ways that that capital is allocated, monitored, et cetera, internally. Because with 125 investing groups, it sounds like a ball of yarned and risk overlays and all sorts of infrastructure and trading become really important. So, just describe how it actually works. If a dollar is going in, how is that allocated dynamically to that 125 team roster?

[00:11:00] Dmitry: We're structured by business lines, by different strategy lines. Our largest allocation is equities, which you see 80%-90% of risk, now is about 50% risk. You'll have a management team for that strategy where they're responsible for helping to recruit, managing the teams, helping to allocate capital to that. And as an investment committee, we all collaborate on that, but you have a dedicated management team for that particular strategy. And then you have the same thing across other strategies. So, our next largest would be global macro. So, you have 40 global macro teams, it's about a third of our risk. And you have a macro management team that's responsible for the same things of monitoring and managing and allocating capital to those teams. And so on and so forth across all the different strategies, commodities, credit, quan, merger-arb, et cetera. Within each of those, then you have specific capital allocation and risk limits to each of the teams. So, for each strategy, you'll have a general box that we work on as a partnership and as a part of that particular strategy team to figure out what does that box look like? And we always innovate and optimize it every year a little bit. What do you want it to look like in terms of what kind of risks do you think people have skill at taking? How much capital do you want to allocate to that? What other kinds of risks you're comfortable with and what amount? Et cetera.

So, like in equities, we want it to be very close to market neutral, very close to sector neutral. We want to minimize factor risks just to have a little bit, you don't spend all your time worrying about hedging it out, but you want to maximize idiosyncratic risks and minimize the factor risks. So, what does that equal to in terms of position? It might be a 50 position portfolio, or maybe for a large team, it might be 100 position portfolio, 50 longs and 50 shorts. Then, you have the same things across all the different businesses, designing that optimal box that people will operate within. Then, you have to customize it a little bit. You might have some things work well in the US, but don't perfectly translate to Asia, for example, or the difference between a relative value rates trader and a more directional macro trader within the macro business. Maybe you have to modify the box a little bit. But it starts with that. Then, you do the same thing across the risk team, so you have a large risk team and then they have specialists dedicated to monitoring all the individual strategies and making sure that everybody's kind of within their risk constraints. And then, the more valuable function once you can do all that is you want to help people get better over time. So, we do a lot of analysis of people's attribution. What are you really good at? What are you less good at? What are other people good at that maybe you can add to your skillset? And how do you kind of evolve as a risk-taker and progress over time? So, we try to give people a lot of feedback on what's working, what's not for you as well as for the overall firm. So, you're not going to take a trader from one style, completely polar opposite, but you want to work on your weaknesses and get a little bit better over time.

[00:13:57] Patrick: I want to come all the way back down to the core unit, the actual investment team and all the things that matter there. But first I'd love to zoom all the way up to your level. So, you mentioned the strategy heads, equities, commodities, global macro, et cetera, that would be responsible for their groups or their teams. But as you get all the way up to the top, to the CIO position, would you describe what you're solving for? Is there an optimization function that's going on? Are you trying to maximize the Sharpe ratio? What is the solve at the end of the day as you put all these things together?

[00:14:26] Dmitry: There's always a balance between Sharpe and capacity. You're trying to always find the right balance for that. And we do that all the way from the individual PM level to the overall firm. The individual PM level, you could have somebody who's a four Sharpe, but they only generate $10 million of P&L a year. That's not particularly useful as the firm grows over time. Although maybe it was useful 20 years ago. So, same thing at the firm level. So, you want to generate high Sharpe returns at scale that generate the type of performance that investors are happy to participate in. So, that's kind of what you're solving for. How do you get there? So, you need to figure out, first of all, what strategies do you want to be in? And then how to build all those different businesses over time? You might have a whiteboard of like, "Okay, here's all the different things we want to have over the next 10 years, but how do you prioritize those?" And then, which ones do you want to build now? How do you want to build them?

So, a lot of what we spend time on is recruiting. So, once you have business plan for something, who's going to manage that? So, you want to get the right leadership in. Then, at the PM level, who's going to take the risk? And you want to really make sure you're getting really top talent. So, we spend a lot of time recruiting. Then, at the development side, today, for example, I did three calls with different risk-takers at three different strategies, 20 minutes each, just talking about what's going on in their portfolio, what opportunities they're seeing, anything we can be doing as a business to help them grow and develop. That always generates a lot of dialogue. So, it generates some ideas that maybe I could say, "Okay, this is a really particularly interesting idea that the firm could be bigger in that maybe I'll put on my own book." There could be situations where one of the PMs was interested in a data point that was coming out from a totally different sector that they weren't disclosed to, but that was going to affect their companies. So, I put those two people together, talk about that. So, that's a lot of what we were doing at the top is having an overall plan, executing to that plan, getting the right people on board, and then making sure that the information flows really going around the firm.

[00:16:21] Patrick: With all the different exposures and managing that exposure and factor exposure, all these sorts of things, gray risk management, I would assume that the idealized end state is some sort of uncorrelated, fairly high, absolute and high Sharpe return stream, and that you deliver that year in, year out every year and that'd be an amazing product, especially if fund correlated. How close to reality is that in these platform businesses? Is that something that's achievable and has been achieved pretty regularly? What causes it to deviate from that? What's been the view of the returns?

[00:16:51] Dmitry: Nothing's a panacea. There's nothing that's perfect. It's a very good investment structure for consistently compounding capital at scale in an uncorrelated way. That's what we're really trying to solve for. So, most individuals and certainly most institutions will have a couple different large pockets of capital that they need to allocate. The vast majority of things that you can allocate to are correlated. They're correlated to the economy, they're correlated to the general risk and market environment. So, whether you're investing public or private, whether you're investing long only, or long-short equities, or credit, vast majority of things, do you have every investment strategy on the board, 90% of them would wind up correlated to kind of the overall economy.

So, when we're trying to put together a market neutral product, that's really uncorrelated, that's designed to fit a particular need. You have years that the equity markets are up whatever 25% and you might be up 15, doesn't necessarily mean you did a bad job and spend the same token. But following year, if the equity market is down 20, you still might be up 15 if you did a good job. That's really what you're solving for. How closely can you get to that? Certainly very challenging to do. And there's periods where it's very difficult with drawdowns just like anyone else. But in terms of the consistency of the strategy, when you're able to do it across lots of different asset classes, and you get to a scale where you do have really diverse risk-takers, it's pretty consistent.

[00:18:26] Patrick: What kind of leverage is common in this model to put on equity, on underlying cash and that's put into the firm? How's that managed?

[00:18:34] Dmitry: We look at things from a volatility-adjusted basis. Using our largest fund as an example, we try to run to maybe a 7% annualized vol number plus or minus one or two. If you can put up a two Sharpe on that, that's a pretty good return. Now, the leverage it takes to get to that is a function of the market environment that you're in. If you're in a really volatile environment, then you don't need as much gross leverage, because the moves you're getting are very large. Whereas if you're in an environment like you had three or four years ago, where it was very low volatility, it was really difficult to have enough leverage to get to the target ball levels that you'd like to get to. But I would say in general, if you were to look at the equity business, it's a little bit higher than your typical single manager long short funds. But it's not tremendously higher. And when you account for the diversification of risk taker and diversification of underlying positions, we'll have thousands of positions in a very diverse portfolio and a very low amount of factor risk.

The actual realized volatility of those books, in many cases, is lower than an individual portfolio that might have a lot less leverage, but it will have much more concentration, much more tilts, and it'll wind up realizing a lot more volatility. So when you look at these things on a ball adjusted basis across strategies, you can compare how much risk do you want to take in equities versus macro, or macro versus commodities, or credit, et cetera, because you look at them all in the same type of way. And so we want to have very consistent allocations across individual risk takers within a particular range. So if we have, say a very senior risk taker in equities who's had a very long consistent track record with us, and we have the same type of person in macro, for example, we want them running roughly similar allocations.

Managing and Incentivizing Risk Taking Behavior
[00:20:22] Patrick: I think now's the time to zoom down into that world of the individual risk taker. And one of the things I was most excited to ask you about is the management of incentives. It's maybe like an oligopoly. There's you, there's Citadel, there's Millennium, there's maybe a few others, but as you said, you can count them on one, maybe two hands. And not just there, you're also competing against people starting their own firms and working in other places. So just tell me everything you've learned about incentivizing talented risk takers in the investing world.

[00:20:49] Dmitry: I think the most important thing is, you really want to try to ascertain somebody's psychology coming in. It's difficult to do, and you can't always have huge conviction at it up front. Sometimes you can, if you spend enough time with the person, if you have a reference from other people internally. But certainly over time as they're with you for years, you certainly get a pretty good sense of somebody's psychology. And you want people who are really looking to build a business within a business, and are really looking to have a long term career, and have the right psychology aligned with that. So this is a very difficult job, mentally. There's periods where whatever you're doing just completely doesn't work. And maybe something's broken in the process, maybe not. Maybe it's just the market is very difficult for what you're doing during that period. There's a lot of management issues where it's not individual risk takers.

Almost everyone we have is managing a team. So some of the larger portfolio management teams might be in double digits of number of people. That's a lot of people management that you have to. Usually it has difficulties at the same time that you're having investment difficulties. You have to be very mentally strong and very mentally committed that this is what I want to do long term. This is the place I want to do it. I really want to build a consistent business. I'm willing to sacrifice shorter term optimization for long term optimization, whether that's spending time hiring quality people, mentoring them, developing them. That's really important. Whether it's managing draw downs, where you need to reduce risk at some point if things aren't working. And so you just need people that have that mentality and are really bought into that. Otherwise, you wind up with the stereotypical clashes of a risk taker versus management, which we really try to avoid.

[00:22:39] Patrick: And so as you think about attracting people with that characteristic that you just laid out, that would describe a good PM, that's going to be at band for a long time, productively so, what typically wins them over? Is it structured financial incentives that make them feel like an entrepreneur, that are just clear and uncontroversial? Is it other things? What are the things that move the needle? How high is the variance of those things across the firm? Like how customized is each risk taker?

[00:23:05] Dmitry: When we started, it was over 20 years ago. And we had really good window into what lots of other funds were doing because we ran this fund of funds on the side. We had like a hundred different hedge fund investments. The level of variance in how professionally businesses were run and how professionally people were treated was astounding. You had completely crazy stuff going on at some places. My thought was, if we could just start by not doing anything completely idiotic, and just treating people professionally and having some vested interest in their long term career, that would go a long way. Because it was just really bad, and very inconsistent.

And so that was kind of the initial thought. You could just do it professionally. You would immediately be in the top 5%, because the industry was very immature. We didn't have any other advantages. We had no capital, right? We started with 40 million dollars. And our competitors were already in the billions. No capital, no reputation in the fundamental investing. At the time we had a trading reputation. We didn't have a lot of experienced risk takers when we started. And we certainly didn't have any great technology or infrastructure. And we had no idea what we were doing on marketing.

[00:24:17] Patrick: Great sales stories so far.

[00:24:19] Dmitry: Yeah. So our first institutional coverage, I opened up the yellow pages and looked up Goldman Sachs and Gold Company. So the only thing that we had going for is was we really were very intent on building a long term business. So we wanted to structure everything in such a way that it would attract talent and retain talent. Because that's the name of the game. These are all alpha strategies, very difficult to totally computerize. How do you attract and retain that talent? So first you need the right underlying structure. So you need economic structure, diversification of risk, and investors that are buying into that, which takes a long time to demonstrate to people that it works. That was kind our model from the get go. Secondly, once you have that, you need to differentiate to the talent coming in. So that'll, by itself, immediately differentiate you from 98% of the funds out there, but how do you differentiate from the other 2% that have a similar scent?

And for us, that's always been the culture and environment that we want to provide to people. And I've always wanted to create a business where you have on one hand, you have the culture and collaboration and environment of a small single manager firm, where it's typically tightly knit, everybody's rooting for each other, you go off for a beer afterwards, it's kind one team. But the down with that is, you don't have any risk diversification, you don't have the infrastructure, you don't have the economics usually to attract and retain the best talent. So if you can combine that with the resources of a global platform, with the technology and the infrastructure and economics and capital, I think it'll be really powerful. So that's kind of what we've always tried to do.

[00:25:54] Patrick: As time has gone on, has that variance, especially at the platform firm level, dampened? Meaning the economic deal that a free agent PM might command at the various platforms looks somewhat similar to each other, and therefore they're really choosing based on that cultural point?

[00:26:09] Dmitry: I think. So I think people tend to optimize for themselves a few different metrics. Economics obviously is one. Economically, yeah, they're pretty similar. People will have different twists on their offerings between your headline payouts, the total capitals, the expenses, the resources that they're providing you, et cetera. So everybody's kind got a different way of putting that together. But I would say for the leading platforms, like all the offerings are compelling. That's kind of one. Two is, what does the person want to do? Do they want to go sit in the corner and just be left alone to do their thing? Do they want to do their thing, but they want to do it collaboratively with management and have lots of resources that build their thing to the next level? Or do they want to actually have a voice in the overall business and the overall strategy, of what is the best way to build this strategy? How can I contribute? How can I make the overall firm better, the overall strategy better?

And people self select on that, because some guys are very comfortable, going into something that's very well established and they have a particular niche in that business, and they just want resources to do their thing within that overall built up business. Others are much more entrepreneurial. Maybe they don't want the risk and expense and distraction of starting their own shop, which is very difficult these days. And for a lot of strategies, it's really close to impossible. But they do want to make an impact overall. And so when they look back on their career, 20 years later, like what'd you do? Generated a consistent pin out. All right, that's great. But over time, if you're spending the vast majority of your waking hours doing something, like what'd you build? What can you look back on and say, I was a part of that? And part of it is being at a world class firm, and a part of a world class strategy, where you could say, Hey, I'm on this team and the team is awesome. I was part of this championship team. We won every year. And two is, I was part of building something, where maybe it wouldn't have looked exactly this way if I hadn't contributed. People self select to different versions of that. And firms are in different parts of that, and businesses within firms are at different parts of that.

[00:28:15] Patrick: What other characteristics, other than the big overarching one you mentioned earlier about just overall alignment, what are the other characteristics you've seen over the years or decades that are common amongst the great PMs that you've worked with? Are there attributes that they tend to share in common, or that you proactively look for?

[00:28:32] Dmitry: Yeah. Psychology number one, it's just that the mindset, of developmental mindset, of every year I start with zero, every year, I want to be a little smarter than I was the year before, always working on their craft. That mindset leads to much more consistency over time. You could have somebody's style go in and out of favor. And you could have a year where your particular thing is in favor. You got the couple big themes or trades right. And that's awesome. But to do it consistently, year in and year out, you have to be able to adapt. And the only way you can adapt is if you have this really flexible mindset where you're always trying to learn the new thing, to pay attention to what the new thing is that's going on, and just try to really build a consistent business. So I think that's the most important. Part of that is the line between conviction and stubbornness. And the line between aggressiveness and humility. You need a little bit of both. If you don't have enough conviction, you don't have enough confidence, you don't have enough aggressiveness, you can't ever take enough risk to put up meaningful dollars to be at the top level.

But if you don't have enough humility, and flexibility, and adaptability, or whatever your style is isn't working, you lose a lot of money. So if you want to be consistent and have reasonable draw downs relative to your PNL, and adapt to different markets to be consistent year to year, it's really that psychological balance between the two. And another piece is building a team is a real differentiator. And doing that successfully to where one, the person wants to do it. They don't look at their teammates as an automated spreadsheet. They want to mentor somebody and have them become a great analyst and eventually a great PM. So having the desire to do that, and then investing the time and energy to do that at scale across multiple people, is really important. If you aren't invested in that, and you don't take care of your team, and you aren't invested in developing them, and taking care of them both financially and from a knowledge perspective, they're just going to turn over. And if they just turnover all the time, it's very hard to scale a business.

[00:30:42] Patrick: I'd love to talk about the source of edge, even just the nature of it, and how it's evolved over time. One of my favorite, I think it was William Gibson's lines, was first identification, then commodification. You see that in markets all the time, you mentioned the hedge fund replica strategies, someone finds something and then it goes away. Just describe, in your investing career, especially the BAM era, how has edge changed most do you think? And I'm curious across any asset classes that you want to dive into. How has it changed?

[00:31:10] Dmitry: Looking at it from, I guess, an equity perspective first, my original strategy from 20 years back, the markets used to be just much more inefficient to where you could have an individual trader put up very strong returns, just because there were so many trading inefficiencies going on over the course of the day or a week. So that still exists, but it's just much, much harder because a lot of those trading inefficiencies have gotten quantified. So now you have the set R programs basically that are doing that all day long, and various high frequency programs, et cetera, in various ways, where they're capturing a lot of those inefficiencies, where previously you could have a discretionary trader capture that. Fundamentally same thing, you could analyze a company. If you were speaking to IR quarterly, that was a differentiator. So that's not a differentiator anymore. That's like cost to do a business.

Building models. I remember when we were interviewing PMs and they said, well, I" build my own models." So I said, "Wow, really? Is that worthwhile?" Like certainly, it wasn't commonplace, because there was enough inefficiency that you didn't need to do it. And then all of a sudden, as more people started doing it, you did need to do. And of course now today, everybody builds their own models. The use of data and technology, so we're offering Python classes for example, internally. And we have lots of folks from all the various strategies signing up to become much more proficient at Python, because it's just a much easier way to screen a lot of data, and have it accessible quickly. And it's relatively newer. The use of lots of different data sets, about a hundred people in our data team now.

And so various teams work with them in different ways. Many teams have their own data people, on their own team, in addition to the use of a centralized team. And that's becoming a cost of business, and more commoditized in some ways, but you're always looking for different pieces of it that are less commoditized. Trading infrastructure, where five years ago even, I would say, to have a really good software at the trader's fingertips that would break down real time, all of their exposures, and factor risks, and concentrations, and tilts in a really useful way, it was pretty rare. We've iterated ours a number of times and now it's really good.

Lessons and Challenges From Two Decades of BAM
[00:33:19] Patrick: What do you think are some of the hardest decisions that you've had to make, either portfolio wise, like I'm curious how 2008 went, or March 2020, some of the seminal really difficult markets that you've faced while BAM has been live? But I'm also curious, the really hard moments or decisions at the business level too? So maybe just walk us through maybe one each, a portfolio side and a business side, what the hardest decisions or stretches have been in memory?

[00:33:44] Dmitry: Portfolio side, I guess I would break them into two parts. One part would be where there's a real market dislocation going on, like an '08 or 2020. Another side is when there's less of a market dislocation going on, but you're really drawing down as a business. We had a down year in '18, which is our only down year. So that was more specific to us, although it was a difficult market. They all bring different challenges. In a really volatile, macro driven period, the first thing we want to do is we want to make sure that we're set up well enough defensively so that we can play offense. Because if you're kind of vulnerable, and you're getting killed when everybody else is getting killed, it's very hard to go on offense. And you wind up in a hope situation of, at some point this will end and it'll all be fine. Which of course it does, but you might be gone.

[00:34:35] Patrick: Right.

[00:34:36] Dmitry: So that's kind of the first thing that we do, is we already run fairly tight. But we just want to make sure that any tail risks that we have, any negative convexity that might be not obvious in some strategies are hedged out. Any traders we're concerned about, where they were struggling when things were less volatile and now they're really struggling. What could we do to help them stabilize their portfolio so that they can survive this period and come out on the other side and do well? And there were lots of those issues in '08 and 2020. I would say like '08, it was amplified by systematic concern where you're just worried about financial world kind of be there. So I remember being on calls with prime brokers going, when are we going to get our money? Which was a real concern at the time, because you just didn't know if they were going to be able to meet the margin calls. The CDS for prime brokers was going through the roof. We went to cash, Q4 of '08, or largely to cash, just because we were concerned about the systemic environment. And the RV trading, which is most of what we do, whether it's the macro or equities, nobody really cared about the differentiation between this stock and that stock, Q4 of '08. So it made a good decision to go to cash, but then it was actually worrisome, like were we actually going to be able to get the cash?

We had some nervous days waiting for wires to come, which thankfully they eventually came. So that was amplified just as a going financial system concern. Another issue was, we wound up slightly profitable that year, in the fund, but we were rewarded with 50% redemptions. We chose not to gate people. Lots of investors needed their money. Then we had business issues worrying about, if we have to pony up money and make sure that you can help the business survive. We certainly don't want to be laying off productive risk takers or business people that you don't want to. We had to step up, and we got to do that a number of times over the years and fund those deficits for periods of time. 2020 we were in a much better place, like as a business, with much more solid capital and great investor base. So we were doing well, trading wise. The improvements that we had made over the years, going through difficult periods, like '18 was for us, where we had too much concentration by strategy, and by risk taker, and by positions. And then we worked really hard to improve that. So by the time we got to 2020, we had much more diversification by strategies, by risk takers, by underlying portfolio positions.

So there's just a lot more bets and a lot less factor bets and systematic bets that we didn't want, was one. And then two, it was really helpful from the cultural and communication sense, like everything that we've always talked about being valuable for having a seat here. It's not just about what's the economics on my PNL, it's also like what's the place where I can actually generate the most PNL? And part of that is the collaboration across teams, and the intelligence that you get of what's going on in the macro environment. That really paid off in 2020, initially with intelligence with the healthcare teams, and understanding what was going on with COVID. And then the understanding of what was going on in macro, with the FED intervening, by the communication across macro teams. It was very stressful in terms of, every day you would have some portfolios that were down a lot, others that were up a lot, markets had crazy swings. But it wasn't particularly stressful on the business level, creating this executing the way it was supposed to be.

[00:37:59] Patrick: If you set aside the really early insights gleaned from watching all the traders and the fund to funds experience, and thought maybe more towards the latter half or something of the band journey. What business decision now, just on the firm side, do you think was the most important that you made, and was it a hard decision to make?

[00:38:16] Dmitry: The most important early decisions, or one, you having the right founding management team. I've had the same two partners on the business side for 20 years. Investing in that upfront, I think a lot of hedge fund managers, when we talk to guys who are interested in starting their own fund, and they kind of walk us through the economics, like a lot of times it's about, "I can get somebody to manage the business side for this amount of money." And it won't be that impactful. And so therefore I'll be better off with the management fee. And it's totally like the backwards way of looking at, in my opinion. So we didn't have any management fee. We started off just trading prop. And so everybody's compensation was just our expense. But even with that, we really invested in management from the start, and that's been hugely impactful over the years.

And I would say the mistakes have also been on that side, where we didn't invest in management of particular strategies, or particular functions like risk at a senior level early enough. And when we did that, combined with a core management team and PMs we already had, it really took us to the next level. And the second thing is the right foundation for a fund. Like if you have a standard fund structure, and you have lots of risk takers, it's just not a sustainable model, because at some point somebody's going to make a lot of money, and somebody's going to lose a lot. And if you can't pay the guy that just may, you're constantly going to have a revolving door of talent, of the profitable talent, and you have to be able to pay people market rates.

[00:39:43] Patrick: So how do you do that, that piece specifically? Like what is the setup?

[00:39:46] Dmitry: Yeah, if you have a top PM, in the old days, you could certainly start a fund. Today, maybe you could start a fund. You could certainly go somewhere where you could get a payout that's very similar to starting a fund. If you're not doing that, there's no way you're going to retain top talent over time. Those two things, the right economic foundation, not compromising that, and then investing in management, and really valuing that part of the business is really important.

Managing a Short Book and Thinking About Rates
[00:40:09] Patrick: It must be really difficult to manage the short side of the book in recent years. It just seems like so many stories of insane volatility amongst heavily-shorted stocks, and just I've heard from other hedge fund investors more and more that shorts that just a sort of balancing basket to take net exposure out, and less and less about generating alpha on the short side. Walk me through the progression of how you've, as a firm, thought about shorting, especially more recently.

[00:40:34] Dmitry: Ours hasn't changed that much. I think that the basic thought process that you hear about short selling is flawed. Trying to run an absolute return fund, lots of different types of trades to try to engineer a consistent high Sharpe return stream. It's not as simple as, "I'm just going to buy the best companies that I think are going to go up for the next 10 years. And I'm going to short companies that I think are going to eventually be zero."

I think if that was all it was, it would be a much easier business. And there would be a tremendous amount of overlap between people's positions, because it's not that hard to try to identify the companies that you think, "Hey, Apple is a great company. Yes, it is, right?" Maybe you could figure that out a little bit before somebody else, but that's not, to me, the value of a hedge fund. That's not going to engineer a consistent return stream. Like markets are just too efficient.

And so that misconception, just looking for one type of trade, creates huge volatility in people's portfolios. So yes, if your short book is entirely composed of companies that you think are zeros, you're going to have a very volatile short book. And if you're good at picking, maybe over time that'll make money, but you're going to have crazy volatility. What we're really trying to do is we're in the relative value business, we want to be in the business of consistent spreads. So whether you're operating a casino, or you're operating a bank, whether you're operating a multi hedge fund, you're in the spread business. And so, we're looking for lots of different types of trades, and you're looking for outperformance between your longs and your shorts. And so, you're going to bucket things in different ways.

Yes. You might have a structural bucket in a particular sector where you might have some portion of your portfolio that's like, "Okay, these are my home run positions that I really think I figured out that Google's going to be great before other people have figured it out, and it's not priced in. And I'm just going to let it come up." Okay. You could have a few of those. And you could have a few on the other side, where you're like, "This is a fraud. I think these guys are going to be a zero." And you could have a few of those, but then you have lots of other types of trades. On the short side, you could have expectation basis. "Could be a great company, but they're investing a lot in their business for the next couple quarter, more than people think, and revenues are falling off a little bit. Expenses will be a little higher. And at this multiple, I think it's going to hit the stock."

You can have competitive shorts, there's a competing product coming out, this other drug company has a similar drug that's coming up, and people don't understand how similar it is, and it's going priced better. There's lot of different of trades. And you need to have a diverse portfolio of lots of different types of positions. And so, you try to minimize these exposures that either you don't have much skill at predicting, or the skill is very low, relative to your skill at other stuff. Your skill at predicting, for a typical, fundamental PM, their skill of predicting how a company is going to perform over the next quarter or two relative to similar companies, it's pretty high, if they have an investment process that's designed to do that, and they're following a pretty tight group of stocks, and they're following them very closely, really understand their business models. They should be pretty good at consistently predicting that this company's going to outperform this company for the next quarter or two, and costly reevaluating that and rotating their portfolios. Their skill of predicting the company that's going to hugely outperform over the next five years, they might have some skill with that, but it's certainly going to be lower, and it's going to have a lot of volatility in it.

[00:43:52] Patrick: In addition to the world of shorts, the other variable that seems to be important for this business model, and has changed a lot recently is interest rates. In what ways do interest rates affect this style of investing, and how do you think about them?

[00:44:06] Dmitry: In general, the higher rates are positive for a couple reasons. One, it tends to correlate with higher levels of volatility. You want some volatility. So the worst environment for us is if there's like nothing going on. If there's nothing going on, and there's very high correlation between stocks and between themes within different asset classes, it's very hard to make much money. And you don't want to run a tremendous amount of leverage during that period to compensate, because that could change. And then all of a sudden you got too much leverage in a difficult period. So that's the worst. So anything that's away from that, which our interest rates help with that, that's helpful. More volatility is helpful. Secondly, for some of the strategies like macro trading, the largest part of macro trading is trading rates. And if rates are just locked at zero, and there's no difference between the paths of various central banks, it's going to be very hard to make much money. And that's the environment that rate traders are in for a lot, and now it's kind of the opposite of that. So you have a lot of rates volatility, you have various paths for various central banks, and you could do all kinds of different trades. You could do curve trades, you could do directional trades, et cetera. There's just a lot to do. And so, that helps. From a leverage basis on equities, it doesn't really matter because you're always paying the spread, and you're always leveraged. So your spread that you pay the private broker between your long and your short doesn't change, the level of interest rate overall goes up and down, but you're just paying spread. So it doesn't really affect us from that side.

[00:45:29] Patrick: What's your view on the opportunity set in the world of private investing? Obviously, it's been another huge trend here. Venture, growth stage, more traditional private equity. What have you done in this area and what excites you, and what doesn't?

[00:45:41] Dmitry: So this is something that we started working on five years ago, that we wish we would've started 15 years ago, but we really like the strategy for a couple different reasons. Number one, it's a good strategy in its own right, even if you had nothing else, because just the trend is companies stay private longer. The trend of technology growth creating most of the value in markets, I don't think is going to change. It could certainly change this year, but I don't think it's going to change for the next 20 years. So the ability to capture that by investing in the best companies, during the best part of their growth curve, you have to invest in privacy market to do that, because now by the time they come public, they're coming public, you know, $100 million valuations in some cases. Maybe it'll go to a billion, but you certainly missed a lot.

That's by itself. But secondly for us, it's super synergistic. The synergies between the public investing teams and the private, both for sourcing and diligence of the private companies, but also to help understand the companies they're investing in on the public side, and their competition that's coming down the pipe for those, and who's taking share, who's winning share, losing share, like that's super important. Tech, that's becoming more important in healthcare than other consumer in other areas as well. And there's a lot of synergies with our equity capital markets business, where we're very active participants in new issues and secondary financing. So there's tremendous amount of investment synergy there, because it's a really attractive area. The problem with it is, if hedge funds are competitive, ventures are next level, because hedge funds, at least you can compete for talent, and that's super competitive, but it doesn't matter how good you are, you can go and buy Google. Whereas in venture, you can't just go invest in snowflake, and they're private because you showed up. You need to overcome the negative selection on sourcing, which is really, really difficult. When we started like five years ago, what's going to be our edge in business plan to eventually be able to do that? Because you have to be invited into the best companies, invited to invest.

And we started doing it in a few different ways. Like one, we personally started investing with lots of different early-stage venture funds so that we would be a client, not a competitor. And we would have some deal flow from following their companies, and seeing which ones were breaking out, and already having a relationship with that fund, and that manager, and that company in a lot of cases. Secondly, we started a conference where we invite our hedge fund people, and combine them with really top VCs, top founders, and put together various panels on data and healthcare research, or cryptocurrency and FinTech. And you'll have panels of publicized private guys, investors, founders, management teams. And we started that five years ago, and it's become a really big draw, and a top conference people want to go. Those few things have created a bit of an ecosystem. The third thing that's really important is you need a dedicated team. In the last couple years, we've built out a really top private team that's solely dedicated to that strategy, and then work hand in hand with the public teams. So when they're due-diligencing a company, and they want to understand the potential exits and valuations, public competitors and strategies.

We can get people who are expert in that particular niche of the market from the public side, as well as from the private side and put them together, if we like it, to talk to the company, or do they really see the value that our guys can have? You kind of need all those things. I think people who are jumping into it without having an edge on the sourcing side, and without having really experienced, dedicated teams, it's very, very difficult to compete, unless you're just ... You could be in the hot market, where everything goes up over time, that's very difficult to compete in. My thought is always like, if we could bring to bear the strength of a really institutional public investing firm, with all the intelligence that that has, like we have close to 300 people in equity research. If you can combine that with really dedicated top-notch private teams, and a proprietary sourcing network. Over time, it's not going to necessarily be in day one, but over time you can really build top-notch business.

Major Influences and Future Aspirations
[00:49:41] Patrick: In what ways was your thinking or your mind most shaped by reading Ayn Rand?

[00:49:46] Dmitry: It was certainly shaped, but my feeling like reading Atlas Shrugged when I was in college, was getting a much more sophisticated articulation of things that were in the back of my mind, where you always kind of thought like, "Hey, looking at the world in this manner makes sense." But you couldn't really articulate it in a philosophical and moral way. And she obviously does a fantastic job of taking that, and putting it into a coherent, logical philosophical framework. And then on top of that, the books are super fun to read. And so, you can get through a 1000-page book and not want to put it down. I became a fan of that, tried to help out, I ran an institute over time, who sponsor a large ... I think it's the largest essay contest in the country for high school seniors, with large prizes based on their essays. That's a sharp involvement.

[00:50:36] Patrick: What idea do you think she most got right? And then I'd also be curious if there's a major idea that maybe you think she got wrong.

[00:50:43] Dmitry: Not anything major that she got wrong, or at least I haven't figured it out. The major idea I think that she got right is basically that capitalism and individual achievement is not just economically the best system, but it's morally the best system, and they're morally and economically self-reinforced. That's kind of the thing that's missing in a lot of the dialogue that you hear in the press and politics. It's always trade offs. If it's done correctly, with a focus on longterm success and achievement, there's usually not much of a trade off. The right course is not necessarily easy to figure out, but if you spend time on, it's usually logical, and you can even figure it out.

[00:51:24] Patrick: You're from Ukraine originally. I'm curious what this episode of history has felt like for you as an American, obviously that lives here, but obviously vested interest and deep personal roots in that part of the world. What's it been like for the last several months?

[00:51:39] Dmitry: Yeah, I was born in Kiev, and best trade my parents ever made, which I thank them for immigrating when I was six or seven years old. It's been horrible. It's just a very sad, very, very sad situation. It's tragic that this kind of barbaric situation can occur in modern times, in Europe, in first-world countries. You don't expect this in Europe. Very sad situation that hopefully comes to a conclusion before too long.

[00:52:07] Patrick: Yeah. Amen. What, if you think about the future of BAM, most has you motivated? What are the Warren Buffett tap dancing to work phrase pops to mind? Like what are the things that, when you're doing them, you're still filled with joy around the investing business that will drive you forward?

[00:52:24] Dmitry: It's really the same things as when I started. I've always had two things that motivated me, like one wanting to be an excellent trader. And so, I'm still active in the markets, and I still get excited about interesting trades, and volatile markets. I enjoy that. And two, just wanting to build a great business, and as silly as it sounds, it takes such a long time to build a proper foundation for these businesses, for this type of business. Maybe other people are smarter than me, and were able to do it faster. It really takes, in our example, it certainly took over a decade and probably close to two decades. Now, I really feel like we have a really good foundation for building new strategies and extensions of existing strategies, with a high likelihood that we'll succeed at them over time.

And that's exciting, because you're always kind of learning new stuff and figuring out you're good at this particular thing. How do you expand it to the next adjacency, and succeed at that? How does it fit in with other things that you're doing? Where can you innovate? How can you approach this problem in a way that's different from what other people have done, that might be better? And the last piece is people growth generate a lot of satisfaction for me. So like when we take somebody who went through our PM training program is now a top PM. And you remember interviewing them when they were an analyst coming through, or somebody who comes out of our scholarship program with college, and might start off in a very junior position, hopefully five-10 years down the road, they're a great analyst, or great PM, generating a lot of PM for the firm. Like that's immensely satisfying.

[00:53:52] Patrick: Yeah. It's fun to think about the career development, maybe above all else as a very rewarding avenue. As we wind down with your trader hat on, you mentioned always still interested in being good at that, getting better at it. Where does that instinct pull you today, with your investing, trading function, not the business building function, in mind? Where are you drawn to investigate or learn or participate today?

[00:54:13] Dmitry: My core is equities trade. A lot of tech in other sectors. I've traded more macro over the last few years as well. I'm more of a directional macro guy. And I like periods when there's a lot of upheaval, when there's a lot of risk off type situations. I'm drawn to that because, one, I like it and I'm good at it. But two, it's also really good diversifier for the firm. We always want to be in a position of strength. When you look at monthly numbers or quarterly numbers for people, and a lot of times they might look pretty consistent, but like what was the mark entry month? Would the alternative have been if the market didn't come back? So like 2020, if the Fed didn't intervene in March, what would your month end number had been? That type of environment is where I tend to get pretty aggressive, and try to really make a difference. When things are pretty common and everybody's doing well, I'm still involved, but I can spend a lot more time on business stuff, and try to grow the business, and recruiting and things like that, because we have 125 other teams that are doing well.

[00:55:11] Patrick: Do you have a most memorable personal trade of all time?

[00:55:14] Dmitry: I have a most memorable miss.

[00:55:17] Patrick: That works too.

[00:55:19] Dmitry: When the mortgage subprime short in '08, we were researching it, and I was really attracted to the symmetry of shorting subprime, and it made sense macro stuff that we were looking at, but we were hesitant to do it as a firm. We were much smaller, certainly wasn't in our mandate that we would ever talk to investors about that we were going to trade subprime. We didn't have the kind of internal expertise on that. And in retrospect, I should have just put it on, and if it didn't work, it didn't work. Deal with that. Didn't have enough confidence from an institutional business mindset to do that.

So we invested, you know, personally with Paulson, and that then did great. And we had a great external hedge fund investment, but could have been home run for the fund and for our clients. So the takeaway from that always is, like, there's always a balance between making sure you have competency in something, and enough expertise that you should be risking your money and your client's money, and not doing willy nilly, but you have to have enough also conviction and ability to take risk when you do see the opportunity, even if it's different from something that you've done before. You might not do it at the same scale that you're doing businesses that you've been in for a long time, but you have to kind of get involved, when you see something. And so, we've tried to do a better job over the years of straddling the right balance between that.

[00:56:37] Patrick: Across the major asset categories you described at the beginning, do you have a sense for in what order they'll be affected most by data, artificial intelligence, modeling, things of that nature in the future?

[00:56:49] Dmitry: Everything becomes more and more quantitative every year. It's hard to say precisely how it's going to look 20 years down the road. So what I try to do is just make sure that we're always on the leading edge of that as much as possible. My personal view is as long as markets are made up of people where the majority of flows are discretionary, that's very hard to totally quantify that. The further out your timeframes go, the harder the quantification comes. So obviously the high frequency training firms, you can certainly quantify the millisecond trading and that works much better than people doing it and it's a great business. But the further away you go from that, if you're trying do private second best thing, and there is no data you have so it's a person and a business plan, and that's kind of an opposite end of that, you need people to understand and research and have a view. And stock picking or macro trading is kind of in between those.

Of course, you have to invest in the data and automation and improving your infrastructure and giving your teams better and better tools all the time to do that. So like last year we hired over 100 people in tech, I think this year we'll probably hire 200 people in tech. There's an insatiable demand for constant tools, whether it's risk tools, trading tools, research tools, etc. So we always want to be providing that. But for the further the strategies, go from a timeframe perspective, the harder they are to kind of fully automate.

[00:58:12] Patrick: Dmitry, it's been so much fun hearing about very unique brand of investing firm. Like you said, there aren't many of them, our first chance to explore one on the show here. So I'm so appreciative of the time and insight. I ask everybody the same traditional closing question. What is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

[00:58:29] Dmitry: I'll take my parents out of it, they've done lots of kind things for me. A memorable one that really made an impression on me when I was a kid, I was doing door to door sales. I think I was 12 or 13. Fairly miserable job, door to door sales. But I was walking around with my bag of stuff that I was selling, and I wasn't selling much that particular day, this guy calls me over. "Amazing, somebody called me over, maybe he wants to buy something." So I run over, start showing him all my stuff. And he is like, "No, no kid stop. Stop. I don't want to buy anything." I like, "Ugh." He's like, "But I really like to see a young person working hard," and he gave me $20.

[00:59:03] Patrick: Simple as that.

[00:59:03] Dmitry: And so that really made an impression on me and that kind of reinforces that there's a value in the hard work just for the sake of hard work. If you can do that over time, eventually it'll work out.

[00:59:12] Patrick: Really cool. A unique answer, I haven't had one quite like that, Dmitry. Real blast, thank you so much for your time.

[00:59:18] Dmitry: My pleasure. Thanks for having me on.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
