
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released November 15th, 2021
Invest Like the Best
Will Marshall - Indexing the Earth
Will Marshall is the co-founder and CEO of Planet. We cover the untold space story, how space is going through an internet moment where cost reductions and performance enhancements have led to a seismic shift in what’s possible above our atmosphere, and how that can drastically improve life on Earth through unique datasets like the one Planet is piecing together.

00:00:00
00:49:51
Introduction
[00:02:07] Patrick: My guest today is Will Marshall, the co-founder and CEO of Planet. Will founded Planet in 2010 with a small team of NASA scientists to build a constellation of satellites that would image the entire earth every day. Since then, Planet has successfully built and deployed 450 satellites into space, which the company is using to create a time series of images for every place on earth. Our conversation covers the untold space story. How space is going through an internet moment where cost reductions and performance enhancements have led to a seismic shift in what's possible above our atmosphere and how that can drastically improve life on earth through unique data sets like the one Planet's piecing together. Once you listen to Will speak about Planet's progress and mission, it's hard to think of a more underappreciated company in business today. Please enjoy this great conversation with Will Marshall.

Space Renaissance
[00:02:56] Patrick: So Will, I think the place to begin since this is such a cool, exciting area space, the space renaissance that we're going to be talking about today in your company, Planet Labs. Maybe you could just give us your impression of what's happening in space. And I think it's going to draw a nice contrast to the very obvious rocket focused, billionaire focused thing that ever... Going to Mars, going to the moon, I think you're seeing a very different side of space and are a part of building that new industry and that new world. Just give us your overview, how you interpret what's happening in this Space Renaissance.

[00:03:25] Will: It certainly is a space renaissance out of the gate. So there's no question, I agree with that statement. We are seeing massive shifts, rockets of decreased cost about four X. That's a big deal. Mainly through reusability of especially because of SpaceX and proliferation of nano rockets as well, which is cool. But I think the other side of it is what's happening to satellites, which is we've seen about 1000X cost performance increase in satellites over the same period of the last five, 10 years. What the main upshot of both of those trends compounding and they do compound, is that we are seeing vastly new data sets emerging. We are generating and transporting vastly more data 10 times more than we were before or more about the earth and transmitting that around the earth. And what's that relevant for? It's relevant for everything here on the earth. It's about data about the earth that helps us to transition to a sustainable economy.

Everything that the countries are trying to do, missions, every company trying to measure ESG targets is relevant for that. And it's relevant for digital transformation, the general trends of AI and big data, helping all these industries become more efficient, like agriculture, transportation, government, and so on. And lot of that data for those digital transformations comes from space. So space isn't this esoteric distant thing with rockets, billionaires only, although that is happening. I think the far more exciting story and less sexy perhaps, because it doesn't involve the rockets or the billionaires, it involves massive new data that is helping us here on the earth. It's helping the earth economy, it's helping us transition to a sustainable planet. And both of those things are super important. And I think that's the untold story.

[00:05:09] Patrick: I think one of the coolest trends in technology generally is making certain things legible to software through data sets, through image sets in your case, et cetera, and the wild things that can then be built on or learned on top of those emergent data sets. And so I'd love to tell that whole story through the Planet lens in as much detail as we can, maybe going all the way back to the beginning. You have the benefit of literally starting, I think, the first satellite, it was built in a garage. So the proverbial garage was a real one in your case. Take us back to the earliest days of Planet its origin story and why you started the business.

[00:05:43] Will: Yeah. I'm happy to do that. And by the way, the investors of dMY the group that we are merging with as part of our going public, his name's Niccolo, and he says all the best software companies build their own hardware, Apple, you can think of like that. Tesla, he considers a software company, but he's building his own hardware. There's a way of viewing that. And I think certainly Apple's, I think, a really fantastic example. We feel that the same. We're not selling the satellite hardware, we are selling data that is produced from that. But by building our own satellite hardware, we create much efficiencies in that, back to the garage days, myself and a small team about seven of us left NASA to start Planet. And we literally started building the satellites in our garage. What we were thinking about at that time was how do we as space geeks help all these challenges of the world? From poverty, to climate change, to everything that was going on.

And we felt that there's a huge business opportunity as well in one and the same mission, which was to image the whole earth every day, because we thought that data would spur economic development and it would help with these real huge problems. And no one had ever done that because it required at least about 100 satellites into orbit. Well, no one had ever launched 100 satellites and we'd have to do things very differently. We had been pioneering at NASA, this thing called the small spacecraft office, which was low cost, planetary missions and other things. And we were trying to take that a couple of steps further and say, okay, can we even leverage consumer electronics? Like the kind of electronics that's in your laptop or in your phone in space and thereby instead of spending billions of dollars per satellite, spend a lot less, like 1000 times less than that, or 10,000 times less than that, like a $1 million or a $100,000 and do something like image the whole planet every day. We figured that we could and so we left NASA to do that. And six and a bit years later, we achieved that mission of having launched the largest constellation of satellites in history. We had just over 100 satellites in orbit. SpaceX, by the way, is just overtaken us recently in numbers of satellites.

[00:07:51] Patrick: The bastards.

[00:07:53] Will: Not that I'm too upset about that, by the way, if you count the number of satellites in orbit, they doubled roughly in the last five years and half of the satellites are now of two companies, that's Planet and SpaceX. So although there's a proliferation, it's really quite concentrated at the present time. But anyway, yeah. So we started building our satellites in the garage and six or seven years later, we got to our daily cadence having lots of more of these satellites, it was much harder than I thought. I thought we could do it in three years or, and it took six, but we achieved something that was really cool.

And we have this brand new data set of an image of the entire earth every day. So it's a bit like when you go onto Google and you see the satellite layer, that image is maybe three or five years old. We are doing that every day for the whole planet and we are keeping all of those images, so we have about 1700 images, for every point on the land of the earth, so a deep stack of images. So it's like Google, but with a time access.

So it's a recent data and a tall stack of information. And that's how we figure out what's changing on the planet, where all the resources are being moved, all the vehicles, agriculture, shipping, we figure all the changes on the planet over time. And we can train all our machine learning on top of that stack of data. You ask any machine learning expert, what's the most exciting thing? It's training data, well, we have gobs of it. We have 1700 images, as I said, of very place on the earth's land mass on average, to train all your algorithms about what's going on.

[00:09:22] Patrick: Sounds like the coolest thing ever if you were a data scientist, getting your hands on this data set. Tell me a little bit about the unit of data. So if I take one of those images, what is being captured by you or the satellites and what isn't being captured? And maybe that's something that may change in the future, but give us a deep dive into the actual unit of data itself.

[00:09:42] Will: Each pixel from our scan is about three by three meters. We collect them in 47 megapixel images. So each satellite takes an image 47 megapixel. So it's around 20 or 25 kilometers across and 20 kilometers high frame image, a full frame image. We take about three million of those images per day to cover the entire land mass. In fact, we cover about just over 300 million square kilometers per day. So that's the unit measures the area coverage and the earth land mass is about 150 million square kilometers.

So we cover all the earth land mass and some ocean territories like Mediterranean, Caribbean, and the South China Sea and a few other hotspots and coastal areas around all the land mass. And in some areas, the land we do multiple times, we have a fleet of fire resolution satellitesthat can have resolution of about 50 centimeters, about three meters, they don't scan the whole earth, they're tasked to specific local. So if you say, where do you say you were in?

[00:10:39] Patrick: Connecticut.

[00:10:40] Will: Connecticut. If you want to take a picture of downtown there, we can do that up to 10 or 12 times per day, but you'd have to tell me I want that picture. And actually these systems work together, so we have the scan that finds changes around the planet, oh, this iceberg moved, these ships moved, this whatever, this field's got tilled, then you can use the high res system to point at those changes. We can say, oh, there's big new building construction here. Let's have a look. There's a lot more ships in this port. Why is that? Let's take a deeper look. What sort of ships are they? So the system's working complement. Really, I think of three legs, the story of planet, which is the scan, the zoom in, and the analytics, the machine learning that enables us to understand it all.

[00:11:21] Patrick: Is there a future where you start to measure more than a visual image? So you start to measure infrared or I don't know what the other spectrums would be or the other information, but if so, what does that roadmap look like? In 15 years, what might we know daily about the earth that we don't today?

[00:11:35] Will: Generally, the answer to your question is the data is going to get a better and better. Better resolution, that's the size of those pixels, temporal resolution, that means more frequently and better spectral resolution, which is more spectral balances, what you're getting at. Right now, our satellite fleet, the main one that does the scan of the whole earth, which is 180 satellites, does that in eight spectra bands. So three that are familiar the eye, the red, green, and blue, but we also have five other spectra bands. So there's a near infrared band, a red edge band, and they're various different things. One helps us to tell biomass. So basically, we can tell crop type and yield for agriculture. Another one that enables us to tell the top of the atmosphere, haze level, which helps us to calibrate all the other data and so on.

Yeah, with time, we will increase that as well. So it's not just pretty pictures, actually. You can't even see these things. We do do forced color images of them. But for example, that near infrared band, as I said, we can tell it's wheat and it's doing this well. And that is how it gets into this agricultural application, which is actually our biggest market. We can tell crop type and yield in every farmer's field, in every bit of the farmer field, that three by three meter box, we can say, how well is the crop doing? Does it need fertilizer? Does it need harvesting? When does it need water? And so actually, yes, we're already getting other information.

And then that's before we build analytics on top of that, that other things that automatically detect certain things like we automatically with machine learning, pull out roads, buildings, ships, planes. So you can now, if you're interested in shipping, you could circle the top 10 ports of the world, just tell me how many ships there are in these ports over time. That's all I want. I don't want to look at the pictures at all. You can now do that on our platform. Now, you can't do everything. You might ask some other questions we don't yet answer, but we're trying to get better and better so that one can actually not have to have a PhD in geospatial science to understand this imagery, but rather actually everyone could get information and value out of the imagery every day.

[00:13:34] Patrick: What is happening in space, literally? Where are these things? Are they in lower orbit? Is it getting crowded up there? Give us a little bit of education on the literal real estate of space and the angles there that are interesting. If this is just going to keep compounding and it's going to get more and more higher resolution and more satellites, what implications does that have? What's the story up there?

[00:13:53] Will: These satellites are in lower orbit, about 400 kilometers up, and that's considered quite low. Most of the satellites are in 800-to-1200 kilometers orbit altitude and lower orbit, then there's the higher ones in geostationary orbit to manage in communications. And a few others like Mio, which is sort of in the middle, like GPS that you use every day for your navigation. Our ones, we care a lot about the space debris problem that you're referring to. There is a challenge of space debris. It's mainly not the satellites. There's about 3000 satellites in orbit today and operating, there's about a hundred million pieces of debris. So the vast majority of it is bits of old satellites. We're not talking about asteroids, we're talking about manmade stuff circling the earth, but it's all the fragments of previous launches.

We didn't know about space debris early on in the space industry, so the Russians and Americans in particular did a lot of stuff that created a lot of junk in space, like exploding bolts on rockets. Or they'd leave fuel in the satellite, some spark happens after the satellite's dead long years afterwards, and it blows up the satellite accidentally. Instead of being one bit, there's now thousands and thousands, and thousands bit. Then occasionally countries have blown up satellites deliberately. Recently the US did, China did, India did. That's mainly to say to the other countries, "Hey, we can knock out your eyes and ears if we want to." Really frustratingly from our perspective because they

[00:15:23] Patrick: Right!

[00:15:23] Will: ... bloody great mess. But yes, there are challenges, mainly not the satellites. It's the debris. So what do we do about the debris? We can maneuver the satellites out the way of each other, no problem. What do we do about the debris, which don't have propulsion systems on them? We actually came up with a scheme when I was at NASA to deal with that using ground-based laser. It's a system called Light Force. Anyway, it's a longer story, but we keep our satellites way down low to make sure they're out of the way of debris, not creating any more debris. They come down naturally at the end of life, after about three years, and burn up in the atmosphere and get out of the way.

Planet's Customer Use Cases
[00:15:58] Patrick: Let's talk now about how customers interface with you. I love the story of starting in the garage, building a very low-cost satellite, the Dove satellites, getting the constellation up there, mission accomplished. It's going to keep compounding and getting higher and higher resolution. What was the first commercial interaction that you had? Did you plan to cater to the agriculture industry to start or did that emerge as sort of like an unpredicted or unpredictable use case?

[00:16:24] Will: We had thought about that use case as a very early one. One way to think about it is look at the areas of the earth and how are they used. About a quarter of the land mass of the earth, 25%, is agricultural land, so we went into that. A quarter of the land mass of the earth is forestry, so we went into that. About 10% is urban development, the suburb and/or urban, then there's of course large areas of marine. Anyway, but agriculture was an obvious one just from a sheer area. We knew that we could do something useful in agriculture within the infrared band. That's a known thing from land establishment been doing this for 40 years, except it's just doing it in a slower cadence, which makes it less useful growing the crops and helping the crop development. It's more for the annual survey of, "How did we do?" Which is useful at the end of the year, but it's not helpful for the grower in the crop growing season.

Because what the farmer wants is intelligence about their field a few times a week during the crop growing season. And so by having daily information at that three-by-three meter area of every field of that farm, every one of their fields, we can help them do what's called precision agriculture. That can improve their crop yield by 20 to 40%, at the same time decrease their use of things like fertilizer and other resources by similar amounts. That's a big deal if you think of that. We can do that. Of course, a trillion dollar industry. This is, as I said, the general notion of big data and AI enabling the digital transformation of industries. Ag is a canonical example. We do that, for example, with Corteva. They use this to image about a million farmers' fields every day. This is not a minor operation and the lot of those kind of companies that can use our data to help with precision ag.

The other areas, we help civil governments, normally things like disaster response. It's also science. So we work with NASA on a lot of science, like climate science, but we also work with state and local governments and federal governments on things like floods and fires. We have been helping recently with the floods in Germany, where they had a lot of big floods, the biggest floods there for 60 years, with the fires here in California, helping the world wildfires. We can both detect where the fires are to help the firefighters, like where's the wind blowing, where's the edge of the fire, where is it compared with whatever hill? So we can help with it real time and we can help with preventative work. So we can actually, and we have, map every tree in California and where's the fodder for growth for future mega fires? That can help them to then make clearing or do a fire lane in the future to stop future mega fires. So it's preventative work.

Same with flooding, we can see the flood the day before, the day after the flood, and see which bridge is down to help the relief effort. But we can also then model where's the floodplain going to be, which buildings are in the wrong place, where should they build and not build. Especially in developing countries, are often build in the wrong place, so we have a big project with Google where we're doing this in Bangladesh and India. It's because the floodplains change, they can then advise governments, "Don't build here, do build here." That's important for getting assets out of the way of the flood. It's also important for finance, by the way, because they also want to understand which assets are at risk from these various disasters or potential disasters. So civil government's another area.

We also work with mapping. There's a fascinating use case, and this is where it gets into what consumers might actually see, because we're not actually selling the imagery to consumers, we're selling to big businesses, but it does affect day to day people because the maps that you have online are kept up-to-date with our data. The news you see about world events, we're sort of shedding light about everything going on on the planet. Pulitzer prize this year was won by some journalist who used our data to discover about 200 potential Uyghur, that's Muslim detention camps in Western China that had previously not been known. And that sort of is really important for journalism. That happens using our data to uncover what's going on around the world.

And also if you grew up in a disaster, our data might be helping the disaster responders to help you. So it actually affects people day to day. But with mapping that one case, we work with Google, for example, on updating the maps that you see online all the time, whenever they find any indication that map is going out date, they automatically task our stuff, it takes a picture of that location, extracts out that new road, that new train station, that new building, whatever it is, and then it updates the map you see online so that your directions and everything stay up to date. So there's a lot of different applications. I'm just giving you a sample.

[00:20:57] Patrick: The story that's emerging is this incredible thing where so much of the world is dictated by legibility around data that we've surfaced. And this is like, what's more important than the place where we live? It makes me start to wonder about big questions like defense or national sovereignty, the famous spy planes from the Cold War or something. This is that every day of the entire earth. So how do you think of about certain nations not wanting you to see certain things? What is sovereignty in space? How will the rule of law and nations interact in this new frontier?

[00:21:28] Will: Good question. Firstly, it's interesting the US and Russia established early on in the space age that they would not be able to fly planes over each other's territory. Famously, the Russians shot down the U-2 spy plane with Gary Powers and kept him captive, but they would allow satellites to flow over each other's territory and partially that's because satellites can't just maneuver around countries. If you're coming up-

[00:21:51] Patrick: Right.

[00:21:52] Will: ... come up to Russia and turn left, you're in the, you're going to go over Russia, right?

[00:21:56] Patrick: Right.

[00:21:57] Will: Unlike a plane you can turn around. So you're going to go over Russia. And then the only question is, are you going to allow them to take a picture or not? Well, how are you going to stop them taking a picture? Then they were like, this doesn't work. Are we going to allow satellites to fly over each other's territory without permission? In fact, they felt that this is a good thing, then they cemented it and it became international law, that up to 100 kilometers altitude, it's your territory, and beyond that it's space. Once you're in space, you are not in anyone's sovereign territory and you are allowed to take pictures from there of any territory without their permission. So we can take pictures inside North Korea. The North Korean government may not like that, but they have no choice.

But vice versa, in principle the North Koreans can put up satellites and take pictures of America and they, in principle, can do that. They don't have that, but they could. It's a bit of a thing that they decided early on in the space age was going to be something that everyone could do and that transparency was better. And in fact, it reduced tensions in the Cold War. We're actually doing a whole bunch of work with governments, intelligence agencies that do use our data and you think, "Oh, well they already have satellites." Well, they do, yes, but they don't have nearly as many as we do.

[00:23:01] Patrick: Yeah.

[00:23:02] Will: I mean, we have the most by far. So we see a lot of stuff that they don't, yet. We do the scan and they only task it at the locations they already know to look, which very interesting to them. We find new things that they didn't know to look for, a new missile base in Eastern Iran we just recently found for example, and that's kind of interesting to a lot of people. I think this is a generally a good thing. We're not, by the way, ever exclusively giving that to one government or another. The more that we give that to lots of governments, the better it is for peace and security, just like it was during the Cold War, the Russians and the American knew about each other. But it's also a significant business opportunity for us because that data is relevant to a lot of countries and they all want to know.

Mapping Out a Business Model
[00:23:43] Patrick: Talk me through a little bit the way you figured your way through a business model, because most businesses you can think about like cost based pricing or value based pricing, just to really oversimplify it. Using the crop example, you're making 20-something percent improvement in a trillion dollar industry. Well, that sounds like a lot of pricing power. Right? How do you think about pricing your various products and services? It seems like a real challenge, that there's enormous investment to get this ongoing thing into space and happening, which took six years, you said. Now you've got to figure out how to charge for these things. It's not like someone can spin up a competitor easily. So, how do you think through those dynamics of the business model itself and things like pricing?

[00:24:21] Will: Yes. We basically sell imagery on a per-unit area basis: kilometers, hectares, mainly just area. The more area you get, there is a volumetric discount, but obviously pay more. We do have a lot of pricing power, I agree. Right now there's no one else that does this. To your point, it's very hard to get this data set. You have to erect a huge satellite fleet and ground stations, mission control systems, data processing and all the rest. So it's certainly not for the faint of heart, so it would take many years for somebody to build such a system. And of course, we're not going to sit on our hands, we're going to constantly improve it. That data archive, it's impossible to go back and get. It's actually, there's some really important moats around what we've built, but yes, we do have a fair bit of pricing power, some level it's value based pricing.

But I do think that what's most important for us is where we going next is not just the imagery and selling the imagery, but selling information products derived from that imagery, what we call "going up the stack." The main thing we are doing today and the reason we're going public, one of them is, of course, we have capital to then deploy. The main areas we're deploying in, one is the sales and marketing to go off the vertical market we already know work like agriculture, civil government and the ones I was describing. The second thing is that there's loads of potential to other markets, but they need more than images. Hedge funds could get huge value out of our data. I mean, we know how well crops are doing before anyone else, the whole world saw your yield. We know the output from all the world's copper mines before anyone else.

So presumably, those things are really valuable to those commodity prices. However, they do not want those pictures. They want a time-series-calibrated date. We have the data to underpin that, but we haven't built the analytics that enable us that yet. So the other side of what we are doing is investing in what we call going up the stack, and then we'll be charging more and more for just information products derived from the data. Anyway, a little bit of a long-winded answer to your question, but mainly it's volumetric based on the amount of data, but also as we go up, the value stack will be charging more for those, if you like, smaller bits of data that we can drive from the imaging.

[00:26:34] Patrick: And how much of that is push versus pull in terms of deciding where to go with that movement up the stack? Are you basically letting people tell you what they want, or are you anticipating what they might want and then trying to sell it to them, or some combination of the two?

[00:26:46] Will: I think it's a healthy combination of the two. We pride ourselves on thinking more than just what the customer's immediately asking for, because often the biggest opportunities from a business perspective are doing things that people don't know they want yet. No one asked for an iPad or an iPhone. When they got it, they were pretty excited. So they were thinking ahead. No one asked for a daily image of the whole earth. Thinking ahead.

The same with analytics, but we also listen to our customers. So for example, a lot of our ag customers are saying, "Can you just fuse this data with this data, and then it would be more valuable?" We are doing that ourselves right now, but we don't really want to. We want to focus on the farming. Great, sure. We'll do that, and will follow their lead and add that stuff so that it takes that off their plate and adds value to us, and it helps the customer, eases their use and helps them to focus where they want to focus.

[00:27:33] Patrick: What does tension feel like in this business? When you're stressed out, what are typically the reasons? It seems like the problems that you encounter are just of a completely different type than a typical business would, given the unique nature of what you've built. What is crisis, stress, tension? What does that feel like for Planet?

[00:27:51] Will: I would say we're a company like any other. There's growing pains where you have to shift different stages of company where not everyone knows each other any more, and then this happens or you need this sort of leadership and not that kind of leadership, and this... There's so many growing pains as we go. I think we've done fairly well, but we are not immune to those things, just like any other companies. I would say it's the nuts and bolts. There are some things that come up when certain actors ask us for data and we're like, "Should we give this to them?" And so we have an ethics committee. We firstly review against the embargoed list. We can't sell to North Korea; we can't sell to Taliban or something, but also, we have an ethics committee that even after that, goes, "Okay, we're allowed to sell to these guys, but should we?" Our data's not generally relevant to militaries targeting or anything like personal privacy, because we can't identify a person, but there are some cases where we worry and avoid those use cases.

In general, our data really helps this wide-scale transparency, and helping companies and countries understand resource movements. That's really very positive and we wouldn't be doing this if we didn't think the net was massively in that direction, but we are trying to... Occasionally a stressful moment is probably if someone asked for it that we are like, "Ah, I'm not sure if we should give it to these people," and we have often refused in those cases.

[00:29:07] Patrick: Data privacy has become a really interesting big issue in a world that's proliferative in data, and so many companies that know so much about us. What do you think will happen in privacy over the next couple of decades when it comes to your business? Or just the idea that assuming all these resolution curves keep going on the same direction, presumably you're going to be able to see into my house on a second-by-second basis, potentially? How do you think about the future of privacy and concerns that we should have there collectively?

[00:29:35] Will: Firstly, right now, we really can't see or identify a person from space, and I don't think anyone can, even with the huge satellites, and the reason is that you're just so far away. You're 400 kilometers away. So yes, we can see your house, but firstly, it's impossible with current technology to see through it, and I don't know how we would do that, and secondly, the pixel size is really large . Even, as I said, the biggest spying satellites in the biggest countries cannot identify a person from space. Their resolution is just not sufficient. And so it's really a matter of distance.

So if you want to get into personal privacy, really, drones might get into that, but satellites... And it's a long way off. I can't even imagine that. It's just because you can't fly reasonably in a satellite lower than about 300 kilometers altitude, otherwise you're just starting to burn up in the atmosphere. To go below that, you really need a plane or a drone. And so I think space, for a long period, isn't going to get really into the thick of privacy.

[00:30:29] Patrick: Maybe you're going to do it all, but I'm curious just to talk, then, a little bit more about the technology of satellites themselves. If you had to group satellites in some sort of taxonomy into different categories, how would you do that today? So there's imaging satellites. You mentioned communication satellites.

[00:30:45] Will: There's roughly five types today. There's imaging satellites. There's communication satellites. Those are the main ones where there's a commercial sector, although both of them have military versions of those things. The other three are navigation, which is pretty much only governments at the present time: Galileo in the EU, GPS here; early warning, which is countries scan for anyone's missile launches; and then there's what they call signals intelligence, which is listening into people's communications, so listening to your cell phone or listening in, and again, this is CIA stuff. So those are the main five types of satellites that exist today, but the commercial ones are really just communications, and now SpaceX with the Starlink system is putting up a big communication fleet, and earth observation, which Planet has put up a big fleet now.

[00:31:39] Patrick: If you stick in the earth-observation planet category, what do you think are the most far-fetched sci-fi potential futures for what the technology might enable, say, the rest of your career or something like that? On some timeline that's long but reasonable.

[00:31:52] Will: Well, I do think that it's possible in the long term that we would more or less be able to have a live image of the earth. I think that that's possible. It's not where we are now, and it won't be for a long time, but it's possible. And then the second thing is I imagine that you should be able to just query that. You should just be able to write... Just imagine a search query box on it and you can just say, "Hey, how many houses are there in Pakistan? Give me a plot of that versus time. Tell me where the trees were deforested, the latitude and longitudes of the trees that deforested in the Amazon in the last three weeks."

It should be able to just tell you the answer to those questions without ever you looking at the images, or it may highlight that in the background or something, but you should be able to get answers, just like you can from Google. So I think a lot of what Planet's doing in the long arm is a little bit similar to Google. Google figured out how to index the internet and make it searchable, and we are figuring out how to index the earth and making it searchable with the combination of the data and machine learning that sits on top.

[00:32:54] Patrick: Can you say a little bit more about that machine learning and that actual exercise? That just seems like a Herculean task to go index the earth. Pretty cool idea, but sounds pretty hard as well.

[00:33:05] Will: Well, it was a hard task to index the internet, but they managed to do it. Well, just imagine a picture of the earth and machine learning and especially computer vision that's been developed, especially, by companies like Google and Academia and others, has been particularly strong in computer vision where it does things like extract out cats and dogs from pictures that you put online. The same technology could be used in our image to extract out a road or a building or a ship or a plane or a train or a tree.

So we just have to do that for every image that comes down. As I said, we have about three million images every day. So you have to do that for every image and identify all the different objects, and then you have basically a database of every object on the planet over time, and then you should be able to exactly do that query on top of it. I actually think it's intellectually relatively straightforward. Of course, there's such a huge amount of work behind that.

Saving The Planet
[00:34:02] Patrick: With this unique data set moving up the stack that you've done, what knowledge about the Earth has most surprised you that's resulted from this data set so far?

[00:34:11] Will: Well, the degree of calamity of the destruction of ecosystems is just staggering. So we are wiping out forests, mainly to put cows on them so we can eat beef-burgers. We are destroying the fisheries with ocean trawling. We are seeing huge transitions. Because it's not actually climate change. It's mainly these things like deforestation and illegal fishing. So it's been driven by humans deciding to change the use of those territories, and that is just really obvious and sad, but hopefully, our data can help companies and countries and individuals better manage the planet. We've, what, lost 70% of life on the planet in the last 40 years? It's gobsmacking to think about. We are just whittling it away still. Our raison d'être, in many ways, is to help stop that, is to help the governments to see the deforestation. So we have a project to map all... Which we do. All the deforestation in the 64 tropical countries, with the Government of Norway paying for the data, helping that data be available to those forestry ministries to stop deforestation. It's a huge project.

We have another one to map all the world's coral reefs, and we just released that a few weeks ago, which is the first map of all the world's corals, classification of different types, and showing early signs of bleaching. Or if there's any illegal fishing going on, we can alert governments. In fact, there are already six countries have established marine-protected areas around coral reefs that we mapped for them. So those are the kind of things that can really help us protect and stop the eco side that's happening on the planet. And so that is both a thing that's super important for the planet, and it's a massive business opportunity, because what is really happening is that global economy is going, "Ah, we cannot any longer presume that natural capital is free." That the trees you cut down, and it's free for the landowner; they can just cut down that tree and it's cost nothing. Or you can just put gases into the atmosphere and it doesn't matter, or pollutants into the rivers and it doesn't matter.

There's an externality of that cost. We've got to integrate the externality into our economic system. And that is the countries saying, "We're going to measure these emission targets and set these limits," and it's companies doing their ESG targets and saying, "Hey, the environment piece I'm going to measure and make sure that my resources came from a sustainable source, or make sure I don't build those assets in a flood-risk zone," or these sort of things. And what does that mean? All of that means those countries and the companies have to measure all that stuff. So this is a massive business opportunity, because we have the data set that's pretty foundational to the measurement of all that natural capital. It's measuring all those things. It's not just that we can see every tree and stop deforestation. We can count the carbon stock in all those trees. Our data is foundational to underpinning the transition to a sustainable economy, which is a multi-trillion dollar transition as well.

[00:37:11] Patrick: The 70% number that you quoted over the last 40 years, which is a staggering, horribly depressing number, what's the attribute of that 70%? What specifically has been wiped out that makes up most of that decline?

[00:37:22] Will: Well, it's pretty much everything. 82% of wild mammals have gone, 75% of insects, 70% of the fish in freshwater rivers and lakes, over half the coral systems; these are all the things that have gone already. We've wiped up more than half of the forests. There was roughly double as much forested land of the Earth 40 years ago. Oh, it's just staggering.

[00:37:44] Patrick: So we're basically an invasive species, is one way to think about it?

[00:37:49] Will: Yeah.

[00:37:49] Patrick: This data set is step one in any change, which is awareness, I think.

[00:37:53] Will: More than just awareness. I feel like satellites have already been bringing awareness about this problem for about 50 years. That's why the climate scientists have been yelling from the top of the mountain-tops as best they can, and telling us, "This is what's going to happen," and no one's been listening. This is the data set that enables us to take action. You see, the difference between what had been happening before with satellites was every few months or every year, we would take a measurement and go, "This is what's going on, guys." Now, it's, "There is deforestation happening there. Stop it. There is illegal fishing there. Stop it." It's the real-time action and the real-time measurement and the real-time enforcement that is actually going to enable us to, I hope, turn the page tackling this massive challenge.

Going Public, Building Hardware, and the Future
[00:38:34] Patrick: One interesting thing just where the rubber meets the road: you already mentioned the company's going public. How do you think about that transition as it relates to this big mission? I mean, if everything we've talked about holds true, this sounds like it could be, both in business terms and in terms of impact terms, one of the most important companies on the planet, or off the planet, I guess. How do you think about the relationship that you build with the business and investing community to make sure that you maximize the odds that that's true?

[00:39:01] Will: Well, look, I'm really excited about going public. I think it's the right step for planet. Planet is ready to be a public company. We've launched and operated satellite fleet is ready. That technology to risk is retire. We've got a mature business with over a hundred million in revenue last year. We're ready. And what we are feeling is the pull, we're feeling everyone needing our data now. Well, then we need to scale up to do that, to address all of that market opportunity. And I think from what I've seen, investors really like it for a number of reasons. One is that our data is completely unique. No one else can get it. It powers a lot of vertical markets. It's not just relevant to agriculture. It's relevant for energy insurance, finance, da, da, da, da, da. They love the fact that it's a data business.

We've got this hard moat to crack in terms of the hardware that enables this, but the data business, we're selling data, and we can sell each image multiple times. So the profit margins are really large. The incremental cost of us selling an image to a second customer's very, very low. So the direct margins are just huge. And then everyone recognizes how important the transition to a sustainable economy is. And so it's space. It's sustainability. It's a data company. It's exactly what the market wants at this time. I'm confident this is the right move for Planet this time.

[00:40:22] Patrick: I'd love to learn a little bit more about the hardware. You said that great quote at the beginning that the best software companies also build hardware because it enables like a very specific one-to-one relationship between the two. Tell me what's evolved since that first satellite you built by hand in the garage. What were the components like then and what has happened? Like give me a sense of what it cost to make one of these things, what's going into it, what is the hardware story here that's most interesting?

[00:40:45] Will: Yeah, since that time we've had 18 design build iterations for our satellite. So just like the iPhone is iPhone one, two, three, four, five, and those satellites have increased in capability per satellite, per day, in terms of area coverage of imagery by 10,000 X over that period. I am not kidding you. That is what's happened from the first satellite to the last. Just in the last year, we doubled the number of spectral bands exactly to this point of best sub companies build their own hardware. Our customers said we needed these spectral bands. So the next generation of satellites, we added four more spectral bands that addressed various customer needs. So two years ago at our user conference, I announced the SuperDove, which is the next generation of Dove. This one, I announced the fact that we'd already completed daily imaging with that SuperDove fleet. We'd already had seven launches launch about a hundred of these satellites.

And they're now operating and getting eight spectral bands that help these extra markets. Those satellites produce five times more than the previous generation of satellites per satellite per day for almost exactly the same cost. Great. That's the kind of trajectory we're on and we're going to continue on. We call it strapping space to Moore's law. Every time there's a better sensor that comes out, every time there's a better processor that comes out, every time there's a better hard drive that comes out, we stuff it into the satellite and put it up. That way, just like you don't want a three year old phone in your pocket, you don't want a three year old satellite in space. We iterate them really fast. We treat them like a server. When one goes out of date, we replenish it. That's why we're on a very rapid trajectory on the satellite side.

[00:42:17] Patrick: How much do you control versus outsource the component section of a given satellite? In one of the satellites, how much is something that you're taking the best whatever sensor from some other company and incorporating it and you're kind of just the chassis that pieces the best in class together versus the Apple M1 chip or something. I'm trying to think of the right analog where your end to end controlling the component itself.

[00:42:38] Will: I think it is a bit like Apple. I think that's a good way to think about it. It's all our own bespoke boards. It's all our own bespoke designs, of optics, of camera systems, of radio systems. We do leverage chips. At the chip level, we're leveraging the latest quad core computer. We are leveraging the latest Ymax WiFi components and so on. So we leverage at the chip level, but we've got our own designs at the subsystem level.

You're leveraging those chips, but we are totally our own radio design and they're vastly more capable than anything you can buy online. We can get 1.6 gigabits a second, over a thousand kilometer range from our little satellites to these little dishes that we built all around the planet, 48 ground stations. I can't believe we can get 1.6 gigabits a second at a thousand kilometer range with these radios, but that's how much effort we put over 10 years now building the better and better radio systems. I can tell you that about every subsystem, the camera system, the telescopes, the power systems, all the makeup, yes, we buy the chips, but the integrated system is really complicated at the subsystem level and it all has to work together.

[00:43:48] Patrick: How should we think about complimentary space curves that are compounding in the same way, maybe rocket launches the obvious one. What are the other like driving tech improvements that are riding one of these kind of Moore's law like trends that are interesting and important that will affect the space renaissance beyond imagery?

[00:44:05] Will: I already mentioned that rockets have come down in cost about four X. Satellites have increasing cost performance about a thousand X over the last five to 10 years. That's already pretty dramatic, right? Very few industries go about a thousand X change in cost performance over a few years. That's like the mainframe, the desktop computer transition in computing. This is like the internet moment for space. There's a lot of opportunities, but it's really complicated. Like I said, it's not for the faint of heart. I would say that rocket piece is quite distinct from the satellite piece. The satellite piece has been driven by Moore's law and general miniaturization of electronics whereas the rocket piece there's just Elon's will to have a reusable rocket, and that's enabled reusable rockets. And that's kind of amazing, but it's a different trend. But I would say again, the thousand X is what's dominating here.

They are compounding. So we have a 4,000 X in cost reduction overall, if you like, but the thousand X is what dominates. And that's really about the miniaturization of satellites. That's taking bus size satellites and making them the size of a loaf of bread with the same sort of capabilities. That's staggering. And that's what's really unleashing, as I said, the upshot of what's happening in space is massive new data sets that we collect about the earth and transporting around the earth in the case of Starlink and ourselves, respectively, and that's enabling new and better economic systems, more sustainability and that's what I'm excited about.

[00:45:32] Patrick: As you go up the stack and more and more of the business is about pre-processed analytics that become more and more valuable, like getting further away from data and closer to knowledge or information, however you want to describe that change moving up the stack, will you then think about almost open sourcing some of the data at the bottom of the stack? Like it strikes me that if this was a nonprofit and you just made this all publicly available, stuff would get built on top of this that would be fascinating if there was no friction or cost to doing it. How do you think about that?

[00:46:02] Will: I don't think that's the right strategy. I think that the data always has value. And by the way, there's another data company around the corner, it's called Google. But you will notice they have open sourced a lot of their algorithms, their analytics, tensor flow, all the computer vision, modules of this and so on, they haven't open sourced any of their data. There's a real reason for that. The data is where the value is.

Algorithms alone have zero value. Data alone has a lot of value. The economists quip that data's the new oil. Obviously there's good things and bad things about that analogy. I don't think that data is dirty like oil and I hope not. And by the way, oil can only be used once, any bit of oil, whereas data, you can pass off to lots of users. So there's an inherent better business aspect of data. But in this sense that data powers like oil does a lot of different sectors, you have to refine it before it's useful to them and it even could get commoditized, but still has huge value. I think that's where we will end up with data. Those that have the best data are going to drive the world and algorithms are super important at going up the value, but without the data, you can't do shit there. And with the data you can. And so the power's in the data. It's very asymmetric.

[00:47:15] Patrick: Do you anticipate that a lot of businesses build on top of you almost API style, like you would build on topic Twilio or Stripe. And is there a good example of that already?

[00:47:23] Will: Yeah. The second part I was going to get to about answering your previous question, because I think that we do want to democratize it so that as many people can use it and build those apps, but rather than give it the data for free, we'll still charge the data, but we do want to make it easier and easier to do that in small amounts, get going in easy way. You have a free trial, but we want to enable them the tools that can get going. You can imagine an SDK and thousands of apps being built on top of this data. We are building that right now and that's why we're going public is to have the capital to do this. The other reason, by the way, to get to another question you asked earlier is that a lot of people still don't know about Planet.

You seem visually just a tiny bit shocked by the story. And a lot of people are when we tell people about that, they're-

[00:48:05] Patrick: Like holy shit.

[00:48:06] Will: No, this is going to be amazing for my industry, whatever your industry, hedge funds, insurance, whatever. Most people still haven't heard of it. I'm telling the story the first time to a lot of people. Okay, was the other advantage of going public is we're going a bit more on a bigger stage. It's not the only reason. And if that was the only reason, I don't think it would be worth going public. But I do think that's a good reason for going public. That is a side benefit.

[00:48:29] Patrick: Will, this has been such a fascinating conversation. I wish we had hours more to learn about what you're doing. I ask everyone the same closing question. What is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

[00:48:38] Will: I should think about that more, but the first thing that comes to my mind is mentorship. I've had some incredible mentors that helped to guide me to where I am today. My PhD supervisor last year won the Nobel Prize in physics. He was an amazing guide. My head boss at NASA who helped me to understand space systems and laws and give me a lot of freedom, and I think of people that have mentored me, that was a gift.

[00:49:05] Patrick: Will, this has been fantastic. Safe travels today. Pleasure to meet you and learn a lot about Planet.

[00:49:09] Will: Thanks bye-bye.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
