
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released May 26th, 2021
Founder's Field Guide
Henrique Dubugras - Building the Financial Center of Gravity
Henrique Dubugras is the co-founder and CEO of Brex. We cover Brex’s transition from a credit card for start-ups to the central account for businesses, why building that central account was orders of magnitude more difficult than expected, and the difference between building a business in Brazil and the US.

00:00:00
01:00:24
Introduction
Patrick: [00:02:14] My guest today is Henrique Dubugras, Co-Founder and CEO of Brex. An all-in-one finance account for businesses. Brex recently raised funding at a valuation of over $7 billion despite being founded only four years ago. In our conversation, we cover Brex's transition from a credit card for startups to the central account for businesses. Why building that central account was orders of magnitude more difficult than expected, and the difference between building a business in Brazil and the US. We also discussed Henrique's long-term horizon for building Brex and how that impacts his decision making for the business. Please enjoy my conversation with Henrique Dubugras.

Brex's Origins and its Wedge
I was thinking about where to begin this conversation. I'm enamored by this idea I've thought of recently that all the best ideas come when you're making things, not thinking about things. I think Brex is a good example of this, where you stumbled upon a frustration or a problem that has now led to this fascinating business. I'm really curious how you would describe the B2B financial system when you stumbled upon this frustration. What was the state of the system? What did it feel like? That'll be a good excuse to then talk through the sequence of what you've built so far.

Henrique: [00:03:24] When Pedro and I started our first company Pagar.me, I would say that, that was pretty like stumbled. We were trying to think of a startup idea, and he worked at a payments company. I had a bad experience of payments so we decided, "Let's start a payments company." That's exactly how it went. Not a lot of thought behind it. I think we were lucky because, especially, and this is 2013, it's a great growing market anywhere in the world. In the US and in Brazil as well, we were doing it. For three and a half years, we were serving B2B financial services to businesses. When we sold the company and got to the US, we tried to pivot out of it and do something else in Fintech, our head kept going back to B2B financial services. It's a thing we were doing for a long time, and the US seemed like a very competitive place, so we just wanted to do that. When we started Brex, it was a little bit more, I would say, planned than when we started our first company. That we actually were looking, and this is going through YC and the partners definitely helping us explore this a lot, what are the B2B financial services that have an opportunity in the US? We thought of a lot of them, we thought about starting with business checking accounts, but it didn't seem that anyone would give their money to these two random Brazilians that showed up. Then we saw, I think, Neobank doing really well, started its credit cards in Brazil. We thought that's an interesting thing, and then they were going to bank accounts and other stuff.

It happened that we tried to get a credit card for our business, and we didn't have FICO because we just arrived in the US and we couldn't get a card. We're like, "Okay, we also don't have that much money in the US. Let's ask our friends around." Turns out people with millions of dollars couldn't get a card. We thought that was really stupid, why can't you have millions of dollars? It's so much money where we come from. Why can't you get a card for $10,000 limit to pay for AWS and all these other things? I think that sparked the first market that we went and maybe planned, maybe lucky.

But I think it was a really lucky market in the sense that it's very rare that you found a market that is underserved and high margin as Pedro and I were big fans of Innovator's Dilemma. Usually, you'd find either highly competitive high margin markets or super low margin, not really competitive markets.

It turns out credit cards for startups, which was our first market, was highly high margin and very underserved. That's why and how we started there. The vision definitely evolved a little bit over the years, but it's pretty similar to when we started up. Basically, all-in-one finance for businesses, and what that means is integrating financial services, so traditional bank products like credit cards, business accounts, lending with traditional software products such as expense management, bill pay, payroll. It's unclear like what are the things we're going to build ourselves or what we're going to partner? We have great partners for some of these things today. If we find a great partner that works really well with us, we're happy to do that. If we don't find a great partner, we'll build it ourselves in an integrated way. But we want to create this single place people can go to manage their finances.

Patrick: [00:06:29] Say a bit more about why you think a high margin space was underserved? It seems like a non-natural state of a business world for that to be the case. Why was that? Was there some weird inertia or legacy problem that caused that to be possible?

Henrique: [00:06:45] I think that the reason that was true is because startups are like a new segment. It hasn't been, since maybe the last 10 to 11 years, in which serving startups is a thing that is big enough for people to consider it. What happened is that big banks always categorized startups as small businesses. Startups and small businesses are the same thing. The reality is they're not the same thing. Startups are much closer to a midsize and mid-market business than they are to a small business in terms of economics for banks. No one was selling to these people. No one was considering them, giving them a white glove treatment, and that was an opportunity. I think it was more of a, I would say, categorization even, segmentation issue for the banks than anything else.

I think that, obviously, there was a technological barrier, which was our first underwriting model was the base model today is what we call a dynamic model instead of a static model. A dynamic model means that we re-underwrite every business every day. Every day we're getting new data about the business and we're making the decision, "Do we increase the limit? Do we decrease the limit? Do we keep the limit stable?" Which is highly different than a bank does because they basically say, "Hey, this is your limit. Unless you default, this is your limit. Maybe you can convince me to increase it over time, but this is it, for good or for bad." That doesn't work for startups because startups have... They start with a million dollars, but they go to zero pretty quickly. You need to have this real-time nature that was really hard for the banks old technology systems to adapt because their old technology sized systems only supported static limits. That you can only do it and not change anything after.

Patrick: [00:08:23] Can you describe maybe what each of the options were to serve startups? You mentioned checking banking cards. There's a couple of different ways to attack or gain a new customer. Then, obviously, in financial services, you often have the ability to cross sell a lot and create new services, which you've done. What was it uniquely about the card business that you felt made sense? What is the card business? Everyone understands swiping a card to pay for something, but behind the scenes, what technology was required for you to build versus stuff you partnered with? What was V1 of the product like to build?

Henrique: [00:08:57] I think that being 100% honest, the decision of card had also to do that we knew a lot about cards because we were processing payments on the other side. If we were to do term loans or we were to do business checking accounts, we didn't know that much about it versus cards, we knew a lot about it. I think that played a big part of the decision, was the fact that cards were within our zone of knowledge. The hard part about what we do, and I think the part that people underestimate about Brex, is they look at the website and there's all these cool features and your rewards. They're like, "I understand," but behind that, there's a huge amount of building infrastructure. Our opinion on the market is the reason that banks don't innovate is not because they don't have the ideas, because Fintech they don't have the ideas.

It's because they're bound by this legacy technology, like FIS or Fiserv that has been built over 30 plus years. That is really, really hard to change. If you ask any bank CEO, they're going to tell you the same thing, "Yeah, everything takes $50 million in a year to do." We knew about that because by interacting with Brazilian banks, we had to interact with them, a core premise of Brex is we're going to rebuild all the infrastructure from scratch. We're not going to rely on any legacy technology from anyone else. It took us a while to launch because we had to rebuild a lot of that infrastructure from scratch. By infrastructure, I mean, hey, the KYC engines. How do I verify your ID and know who you are and do all the checks that we need for compliance? AML risk models, the core ledger to know how much is the balance. The authorization system to see which transaction can go through, which transaction can't go through. Fraud systems to detect which transactions are fraudulent. I can go on and on and on with like a huge like the reward system. It's just a lot of stuff that traditionally banks and vendors, people, other companies all use vendors for. We basically rebuilt everything from scratch, and that took a long time, but it's what allowed us to innovate.

Patrick: [00:10:48] How long did it take to build that stuff?

Henrique: [00:10:49] It's still building till today. We built the bare minimum to launch in 2018. One of the reasons we only worked with startups is, look, to build faster we built it in a way to only work for startups. We asked things in the KYC like, "Who's your investor?" Obviously, is a question that doesn't make sense for outside of tech businesses, but we relied on it early on in order to launch faster. But till this day, we're building a lot of this infrastructure.


 

Source: Brex Card Processing Infrastructure

Patrick: [00:11:13] I think people would be shocked by the, we'll call it, market share that credit cards have of B2B payments. It's ridiculously low, like low single digits, whereas maybe it's half or more for consumer purchases or payments on credit cards. What drives that difference? Obviously, you've already been successful and yet the market share is still that low. That's probably a good thing for your future, but it's also just a crazy low penetration from what one might expect. What drives that? Why is so much of it still cash or ACH?

Henrique: [00:11:39] It's just legacy. Suppliers always took payments. The other thing that makes this style a little bit misleading is I think when they do these stats, it's all volume. It's not of number of purchases. There's a lot of B2B payments that are in that order of tens of millions of dollars or hundreds of millions of dollars. I think it's going to be hard for that stuff to go on card and pay the fee of a couple of percentage points. But I think it's changing a lot, and this is hugely accelerated due to COVID. February or January 2020, and if you looked at the amounts of our total GMV that came from companies like Facebook and Google, it was a certain number, a certain percentage points. Then after the pandemic, that number is much higher because a lot of other stuff went down and this stuff went up.

As higher margin vendors become a bigger percentage of the total supplier payments, I think that penetration is going to increase. If you look at a tech company, actually, a lot of their B2B payments are on card. Because the suppliers they buy from take card and there's high margin businesses, so that's Slack, Facebook, Google, AWS. All these different businesses that are tech businesses and they like credit cards. Versus if you go to a more traditional business, a restaurant, maybe the wholesale food provider I'm buying from only takes checks because they all been taking checks for a long time, so that's the way. But if some new startup comes around that does wholesale food for restaurants, that takes card and it starts growing a lot, it's probably going to shift the penetration.

How Credit Cards Work
Patrick: [00:13:14] I'd be really curious, coming from Brazil, having built a payments business there, there's unique features of the US market, especially, interchange. Credit card fees are higher here structurally than most of the rest of the world. How do you think about that as someone building a business where that's a key part of your revenue model is interchange and the US is so different. What did your experience from Brazil relative to your experience in Brazil and the US, what has that taught you? How does it make you think about the future of the business model?

Henrique: [00:13:42] The most interesting thing for me is how much US consumers are obsessed with points. It was the craziest thing when I got here. People were like, "Oh, I love my points." You think, "Really? Like love is the word you would describe about points." Everyone has a friend, points freak that has 18 different credit cards. You optimize here and there. It's very cultural, which was quite interesting to me coming from outside. There's also some of the reasons I get more comfortable that interchange is not going to get regulated in the US. It's like you would have a pretty vocal group of people that will not like that decision because it would kill the points.

Patrick: [00:14:17] Can you describe why it would kill points, just so people understand?

Henrique: [00:14:20] Yeah, so the reason it would kill points is because today out of, let's say, roughly 2% that banks make on the cards, a lot of times, more than half of that goes back into the point system. If they killed it and say, "Hey, interchange now just 1%," they don't have enough margin to do that anymore so it would die. It happened with Europe, a lot of places they regulated there's no points. It was quite interesting, but I actually like interchange business models a lot because it allows you to subsidize a lot of stuff that a consumer would normally pay for, but they don't have to pay for it because of the interchange model.

Patrick: [00:14:55] What's an example maybe beyond points or is points the primary way that, that happens? What is interchange and the high margins that they provide to the company allow you to pass onto the consumer?

Henrique: [00:15:05] A lot of cards have higher grace periods. Close your statement within the day and then you have like 30 to 45 days to pay it. 60 days to pay for it since the first day. At least where I come from Brazil, 60 days to pay something is going to cost you 10%. It definitely allows some funding and working capital needs. I think the other thing is, look, we have now a business account that we don't charge any wires, ACH or anything like that. All interchange is subsidized. Because we have interchange, we can give all these seeds for free. We just launched premium and we charge $29 a month for it, which is cheaper than any other software. If you were to buy like Expensify or Bill.com and any software that competes with this, it's dramatically more expensive. $30 per user or something like that. We're like $29 all in. Why is that viable for us? Interchange subsidized. Chime doesn't charge any fees. There's a lot of stuff that is only possible because of the interchange business model that allows consumers to actually pay less fees.

Patrick: [00:16:01] It makes me think of, in the asset management world, it's quite interesting. The business model is to charge a percentage of assets under management. But it's not a check, it's a scrape from the account. If you could imagine someone writing a big account, a $10 million check or something to a manager, it would be crazy. But the fact that it's hidden automatically, psychology barrier to change, the interchange seems to share. One little idea that stood out reading about the business was this notion that for a startup, it should be as easy to open a Brex account as it is to get a new email address or something, and should happen that fast. That the underwriting was totally different, like you said, you asked for people's investors names, you check their cash balances, did very unique things for a unique customer segment. Talk me through like the first couple of sales or even just the first sale that you had as a company? Where a company adopted Brex as their credit card. What did it take to get there? What do you think was responsible for it? I love the very first revenue event of a business.

Henrique: [00:16:56] The first time I actually thought, "Oh, I think this is going to work." I received a cold email from Alex Wang, who's the founder of Scale, a big company. He's like, "Hey, man, I heard from my roommate that you guys are building a credit card. I couldn't get an Amex because I'm 19 and I don't have a FICO score yet. Can you guys hook me up with a beta?" I'm like, "Yeah." That was our first real customer, and first time it was like, "Okay, cool. I guess people need this. What we're building is not going to be useless." Took the cards in person to him, and I could only mail cards for our office at that point. Went there and helped him set up. I sent him the password on an email, which is probably not secure, but it worked out.

Patrick: [00:17:38] What was happening, or what was breaking, I should say, in the early days? Because if you look at your business's history, it had instant fit with the market? It just started to work very quickly. People were pulling it out of you. Growth is awesome like that, but it's also can be very painful. What was breaking the most? What was the most painful thing to have to overcome in those early days?

Henrique: [00:18:00] The most painful thing was in order to start the business, we couldn't start with our credit card. We had to start it with a prepaid card that we pre-funded for you and then you paid us back later. But the card...it is a prepaid card so it didn't work a bunch of places. We would have people going like Instacart, but Instacart didn't accept our card. Because prepaid cards are a pretty big source for fraud, so I get why they do it. But we couldn't get a credit BIN like the credit card at that point, and it just didn't work at random places. We're like, "Okay, that sucks." Customers called us like furious when that happened.

Patrick: [00:18:38] How did you fix it?

Henrique: [00:18:40] The way we did it is we started out of the market to get up and running fast and that was the only option that they had at the time. At the same time, we started working on getting our own deal and our own partnership with a bank. But getting a partnership with a bank when you're still young, it takes a while. So between getting a partnership and building all of our software and stuff took like over a year. That was the main issue early on, but we had eventually got it.

Marketing and Distribution
Patrick: [00:19:02] What was the key marketing strategy or lesson early on? It seemed like you guys came out of nowhere, and all of a sudden, were everywhere. How much of that was organic? How much of it was intentional and deliberate? What did you do differently and from a marketing standpoint in the early days around the cards specifically that you think was so successful?

Henrique: [00:19:21] Two things, so one is an extremely, extremely clear message, which is credit card for startups. Everyone knows what a credit card is, everyone knows startups is, no question on what we do. No question where we were from. This is a hard problem where some businesses are not that easy. For example, even our business today, we do so much stuff and we're calling ourselves all in one finance or businesses. It's not as clear as it was prior corporate startups. It's hard, I can't think of anything better. But I think early on, we were one product for one segment, so it's super easy to just say, "Hey, this is what we do. This is who we're for." I think that's very powerful. I think no one at the point was like not marketing specifically for startups. No one was saying like, "Hey, this is for startups."

Some people were saying, "Well, this is for the fastest growing businesses. This is for SMBs." But no one was saying like for startups. The second point is, our target market was small in terms of number of companies. There was only like 70,000 startups in the US. None of the paid ads worked for us. We couldn't target on Google and Facebook startups. We had to be more creative with marketing because the traditional stuff, when everything is like, "I'm just going to buy pay marketing ads." For us, it didn't work, so what do we do? We adopted this pretty well-known outdoor strategy. Most startups are in San Francisco, and the ones that aren't, they come to visit to raise money here. Let's just market in San Francisco. We got all the billboards in the city for $300,000. Not all of them, but a good chunk of them, and everyone just knew us immediately. Three months after everyone knew what Brex was. It worked super well. I think people, I would like to say, I was the creative genius behind it. I wasn't, our Head of Sales, Sam, had the idea and executed on it and did a great job.

Patrick: [00:21:04] I love this incredible clarity and focus of message and then incredible clarity and narrowness of delivery. To just pick exactly where your customers are in a unique way and that's it. It just worked. How has that evolved since? You've told that story before, I love this story. It's one worth retelling for its elegance. What sense has changed about how you think about growing the Brex brand, about reaching the right customers, where they live? What continued distribution lessons have you learned from that early elegant success?

Henrique: [00:21:36] Well, look, I think we're relearning a lot now. It's really hard going from one product to one segment for like four products now to many segments. I would say that the only insights we have till this day that I would advise people is like I think a lot of founders in Silicon Valley they're engineers and their dream is just to build software. That you just put it online and people pay for, and that's it and you make money. Look, our business has a lot of not so sexy parts. Financing costs, we just did a securitization. We have all this infrastructure work. We have a lot of people. We have a lot of ops and credit and collections, and calling people to give our money back.

There's a lot of parts that are super nice, but we have a Salesforce, an outbound Salesforce, pretty early on. It went really well for us and it works really well for us till this day. I think a lot of people have this mentality of, "Hey, let's build a product," and they'll come. I think we were the opposite. We were like, "Let's go after every single customer that we can." We have very, very aggressive outbound sales from the very beginning until this day.

Patrick: [00:22:40] What did you learn about building or what have you learned about building an effective Salesforce? I typically would think of like an enterprise Salesforce selling whatever it is, $500,000 contracts or something like this and there's the annual quota. How does what you've done with sales differ from a traditional enterprise sales organization?

Henrique: [00:22:59] I think that we were very experimental and we weren't afraid to iterate. Our sales leader, Sam, was very scrappy that he didn't just come here and say, "Hey, this is my playbook. Let's go and do it." I think the way he thought about is let's keep iterating the messaging and let's keep iterating your tactics and was continuously improving cycle. Our view was, "Hey, let's call customers, let's email them, let's get them on the phone. If we can get them on the phone, there will be a higher chance that you can convert and let's make the economics work for that. I think in the beginning we really wanted people to buy us for a very specific reasons." For example, is like they're going to buy us for the reason they're going to buy us, just embrace it and sell it and make the sale simple. I think that was the other thing that he taught us that I thought was quite interesting.

For Pagar.me, we were selling our first business like we were selling APIs for developers to build payment tools on top of it. It was like pretty complicated sale. When we got to Brex, we wanted to sell them on the automation of their books or the feature of the receipts. Sam was like, "Look, I think people love that and it's awesome. But, man, we can give higher limits with amazing rewards. Let's just get them on for that, and they're going to love all the other features. But let's just make the sale simple, the value proposition super clear and more people will sign up. I guarantee you." I'm like, "Okay." Actually, it's true. People after they joined Brex, they love all of our software features but a lot of times when you're signing up, you're excited about the rewards, you're excited about the limits.

Patrick: [00:24:25] There's an interesting line from Scott Belsky, he talks about window dressing in stores. The thing that gets you in the door is typically not even the thing you buy or ultimately care about or go back for, but you need to get somebody in the door. Simple and attractive and unique is good. An interesting example of that.

Henrique: [00:24:40] Great point. I'm going to steal that.

The Explosion of Fintech
Patrick: [00:24:41] The thing that I've noticed recently in the last, call it five years is this just enormous explosion of Fintech businesses, of financial services going digital. Whether that's Neobanks or what you're building or so many others are successfully building. Why now? What is it about this environment that you think has become so fertile for all of a sudden there to be this Cambrian explosion of financial services technology businesses?

Henrique: [00:25:06] I think that Fintechs have been a concept that should exist for a long time. You're building a startup. If you think of a company like Uber, people said, "Hey, this is how much cabs make in a year." Believing in Uber required you to believe in that the market was going to expand. You have to believe that, which is a hard thing to believe. If you look at Fintech, there's hundreds of billions of profits every year from banks. It's an existing profit pool of legacy players that are pretty fragmented status show in US. This should have been disrupted a long time. The question is like, "Why not? Why wasn't it disrupted a long time ago?" There's two things for me that changed. One, there was this belief that banks had an inherit advantage in order to serve customers because financial services were always thought as lender. The purpose of banks is to lend, so they have their ability to use deposits to lend, so they had an inherent event. I think what happens is 10, 12 years ago when Stripe and Square and a bunch of other companies started, people started realizing that Fintech is about more than lending. There's all these other profit pools in Fintech around payments, around accounts, around cards, etc. All these different profit pools that are more transactional, more payments, less balance sheet heavy. It started an unbundling of that, and a few companies became really successful, like Stripe and Square, incredibly successful companies. It allowed, I think, investors to start investing a lot into Fintech. Actually, that makes a big difference in Fintech because it is a capital-intensive business.

We raised $57 million prelaunch. If you asked me, "Why did you raise so much money in prelaunch?" The reason was when I went to a bank, they wanted to see that we had a balance sheet. They wanted to see that we have to set a million dollars in the bank account and that we're going to be fine. They don't like scrapping us. They don't like you having nine or 10 months of runway. They want you to have many years of runway. Availability of capital of Fintechs being able to raise a lot of money, allowed the partnerships, the access of capital markets. A lot of these things that weren't possible before to build a little bit more capital-intensive businesses and the payments. I think that's a big part of why it started happening.

Raising Capital
Patrick: [00:27:12] A typical, large seed round today, pre-launch round would be like five million. That's an order of magnitude bigger. Talk me through that unique dynamic. What was the strategy there? How did you arrive at that amount? What was the way you structured the narrative or the incentives? This is very unique.

Henrique: [00:27:27] It wasn't all in one round, it was in two rounds. The first round was a $7 million round that we raised. I think at that point we just optimized for getting like, who were the best people in Fintech and how do we get them on our cap table? I think we did a good job getting a few of them, so we got Mickey from Ribbit one of the most successful investors in Fintech, if not the most successful. Then we got Max Levchin, Peter Thiel all these people. They were incredibly helpful for us starting. Then after a year we had maybe like 100 beta customers after this round, March, April. YC came around and said, "Wow, we've seen a lot of companies trying to do credit cards and they never launched. They never had any customers."

That's something we realized actually early on, it's like a lot of people tried to do what we're doing, it never worked. Then we had 100 customers. It was actually preempted. They came by and said, "Hey, we want to preempt your next round." There was a whole negotiation process and Anu invested 50 million in that round. It was not obvious at all. We had 100 customers, literally, but it allowed us to do a lot of the things we needed to do to grow the business. That capital was incredibly, incredibly important for us. Honestly, I give her credit to seeing that what we were doing was actually hard and we deserve that shot at that point.

Patrick: [00:28:37] She's such a badass. I love her. Amazing. She's the best. The interesting next stage for me of the business is so you've got this very simple message, very simple, clear service to a segment or a niche. Then the story from then to now has been one of expansion. You already mentioned it, lots of different segments, products, messages. Talk me through what you've learned or what you did to drive the decisions that you made to get to here? What was, and how did you make your second major product decision and I want to draw that line to what the business looks like today?

Henrique: [00:29:14] The hardest decision that we've made was building cash for our business account. It was September, October 2018. The card had just launched and it was getting a lot of traction. We had just raised our billion dollar round. This is probably like three months after the launch. We made a decision to basically get 75% of our resources and invest it in a newer product. It was not obvious at all. Our board was like, "Are you sure you want to do this?" Again, think of a lot of companies that have a successful first product and what they do is take all the resources from that product and put it in an improvement product. But we just had like super high conviction. I give this credit to my co-founders as well. I had some conviction, but he used to say, "We just need to survive until we have our business account."

The reason we did that was, we always thought that having the core accounts, the checking accounts, was where the center of gravity was for the customer. If you had that, you could cross sell anything. If you didn't have that, it was much harder to cross sell stuff. That was number one, and number two is we could only build the most beautiful experience of card, have limits, be like the highest stable. We didn't rely on third-party data aggregators like Plaid, for instance. Because they are great companies. Look, honestly, I'm super respectful. I love Plaid, I think they're an amazing business, but it fails a lot. Not because of them, because of banks have these legacy technology, disconnection all the time and a bunch of issues.

It doesn't work as well as it could have like all the bank for good, but it provided somewhat of a bad experience. A lot of times our customers are like, "Look, there's no way to solve it besides if the customer uses our own accounts."

We diverted all the resources and started building it. Honestly, man, it took twice as long, three times as many people, it was a lot harder than we expected. But it works really well now and it's growing really, really fast and I don't regret it one inch, but it was probably the most non-obvious decision we had to make.

Patrick: [00:31:05] It's very clear the philosophy behind why make the decision to own the sort of place of record for a business's finance or the center of gravity, a nice way of putting it. What was like the darkest moment for you of that piece of the business's story, building the central account?

Henrique: [00:31:22] I think it was when we kept pushing launch months. We thought we were going to build this in six months, then a year and we still don't mind being launched like are we bad, are our team bad, or what's happening? We promised all these investors that it was going to be the launched and it wasn't. It sucked because I felt like I was misleading people. Generally it wasn't, truly a mistake, but thank God we had an amazing investment group. Super supportive, but it was a lot harder than I was expecting.

The Future Possibilities
Patrick: [00:31:50] Then now that you've accomplished that and it's going to be, I assume, a fixture of the business and that central point of gravity. Why and how, and what does that unlock around it? You had an interesting on-ramp now you've built a locus, a center of gravity here in cash and the central account. What's exciting about what that allows for in the future for Brex, this all-in-one financial concept?


 

Source: Brex: The Future of Business Banking and Cash Management

Henrique: [00:32:11] I would say three things. I'll give you three examples of things that rely on this integration that we're super excited about, that we're positive for. The first one is around reporting. Before, if you think about reporting on your business, you have your Amex statement, you have your bank statement, you have your bill.com statement. You have your Expensify statement, you have all these different statements that some accounts and then the end of the month goes, reconciles everything, take some time and gives you a report. "Hey, this is your piece." For Brex, it takes 10 business days after the closing of the month. First of all, business can take months. Accounts aren't that goods, etc. If you have everything on Brex, you pay all of your bills on Brex, all your car transactions, all your reimbursements, like everything is in one place.

We can actually give you real time reporting on your business, which is where your money is going and what are you spending it on in real time creates independency for the business owner, from like the financing or the accounting to be on like reporting. Obviously, it's not going to be like perfect, perfect, but it's going to be like 90 plus percent of the way there. I think that's one example, and it's not possible to do that by just stitching together a bunch of data from different places. You actually need to own the data. For example, if you pay Facebook through card and you pay Facebook through a bill pay or through a bank transaction that needs to go to the same Facebook in your reporting. You can't do that, if it's just coming from like a bunch of different placed data.

That's one example, second examples are in credit. I think that there's a lot of interesting credit products that we can build. The first one being, what we call instant payouts, which is a product we launched a few months ago, which basically is, we connect to all the marketplaces. PayPal, Stripe, Shopify, Amazon, etc. Instead of making the money available for you in two or three days or 14 days on Amazon, we can pay you instantly. Instantly you can have access to the money. The only reason that's possible is because we own the account, so we can actually make money available instantly, instead of having to rely on ACH and wire to send the money over. We're giving businesses access to their money in real time, like a sale goes through, you can get access to that sale immediately instead of having to wait for any waiting periods. Whenever the day settlement comes, the company pays us automatically and it's all good. That's another product of where it was not possible unless you owned that account and you owned the integration, you can see everything coming. Each of these companies have individual products that settle instantly in your account, like Square has their instant deposit products, but maybe I don't sell it through Square. I sell through Square and Stripe. I want to get instant deposit for half my money.

Patrick: [00:34:41] It's a fascinating thing. It's like this idea of, you've mentioned a few times static processes that Brex is turning into streaming processes. Static to streaming is such a fascinating thing for tech businesses to attack. I'm familiar with this business Vanta which does SOC2 compliance. It's the same concept. Instead of some auditor coming once per year and saying, "Stamp you're compliant," it's constant monitoring of your compliance. It seems like what you've done is attacked all the static points of the financial services stacked for a company and turned them streaming. Is that like a fair summation?

Henrique: [00:35:15] Pretty fair summation. In financial services, everything is in batches now because of banks and we're turning it all into real time. Literally that's how things were done before is in batches. Now we're doing everything in real time.

Building in the US vs. Brazil
Patrick: [00:35:26] Yeah. Given that you were successful building and selling a business in Brazil and then coming to the US and doing it. Outside of just financial services, where obviously we talked about interchange already, but what are the most notable differences between your experience as an entrepreneur there and here?

Henrique: [00:35:42] Very different and they're hard in very different ways. I think that three main things, I would say that are the biggest difference. Number one is just sheer volume of capital. Our first company, we raised a million hives, which today is probably around $200,000 at the time it was maybe $400,000. Currency didn't help. Man, it seemed like infinite money and everyone that came in, you negotiated their salary like super aggressively. We had a shittiest office. I took the bus to work. It's not super safe to take the bus, it was also... I had a super low salary. Everything was very tight. Getting to profitability was the main thing a company had to do. When can you get to profitability, is when you started being a real business in Brazil. When you go to the US and we had $57 million, and we had like 10 people, you just make different decisions.

Look, the companies here are less efficient. I can tell you for a fact. I know a lot of them. I know how they work in Brazil, they're all super inefficient, purely. But in tech, it matters some, you don't want to be super wasteful because there's obviously the extremes. But it doesn't prevent them from becoming super valuable. Second thing difference, the biggest difference is around executives.

It's really hard to hire a head of product in Brazil. Why? One, product is not a function. Two, there's not many people who've gone through growth stages. At Brex we only hired people in our executive team that had gone through successful growth stage in startups. It's the only profile we have.

Just to pick on somebody like our head of engineering was early at Stripe, left when they were really big to become our head engineer. He learned a lot about the mistakes that they did and then we just skipped a bunch of those mistakes.

He learned a lot of the stuff that was right about the beginning and we just copied all of it. I think that, that's something that just accelerated it so much in terms of being able to grow as an organization. We went from 100 to 400 people in one year, and obviously it was hard, but it was possible. It was only possible because you have people like, Cos that already knew what to do. In Brazil that doesn't exist. You can't hire, there's no such thing because there hasn't been enough cycles of enough startups to have people have gone through that growth phase successfully. Now it's starting to change. There's amazing startups coming out of Brazil, but at the time we were doing that, it wasn't true. All my friends that have international companies, that's usually a big issue. Every function in the US there's someone who did it and went through that growth phase and that helps you accelerate a ton.

I think the last thing is just bureaucracy. In Brazil, it took us a month and a half to get an office and internet set up and incorporate a company. Just those three things took a month and a half. In the US we did it in two days, except for opening a bank account and getting a credit card, that took forever, but now I see it here. But the rest of the stuff is super easy and frictionless. You have to worry about things like labor law and people suing you and taxes. There's all these things you, as a founder... I spent like 50% of my time thinking about non product, non user stuff versus now I spend 100% of my time taking only important things about the product and the users and the customers. That also adds a big amount of friction.

Patrick: [00:38:55] The inefficiency point that you made is really interesting. We've been looking at some businesses that started very capital constrained, and it's amazing the efficiency that, that creates in the culture of the business and also in like the core unit economics of whatever the services or product is. What are the ways that you see most inefficiency in US startups relative to what you saw in Brazil? Where does that inefficiency lie?

Henrique: [00:39:17] I think the biggest point is just R&D. Costs of an engineer in the US, it's not like two or three times, sometimes it's five, six, seven, 10 times more than someone outside of the US. Look, I love hiring engineers and we spent a ton on them in the end. I think that's the right thing to do, but it's much harder to be profitable and be efficient, just like in every other business. With the engineering costs in the US you have to be really big to make up for it.

Whereas I think in these countries you don't have to be that big in order to make it up for engineering. It's just a five, six X difference in your biggest costs. We do build very complex software, but a lot of businesses don't build back on those software. Is it really worth five, six, seven, eight times the price? I think remote would really help with this now, because I think a lot of businesses will be able to exist and hire good people in the US, but also hire people outside of the US for cheaper. I think like remote will make the overall margins of tech increase a lot.

Remote-first Businesses
Patrick: [00:40:16] Talk about the trade-offs there. I know, obviously you're a remote heavy business or remote first business. What are the best things about it that you've learned and best practices and what are the drawbacks like almost everything has some costs? What have you found the costs of being remote to be?

Henrique: [00:40:28] We went through the whole journey of deciding we're going to go remote. Are we going in person or is it remote, what's going to be better? I think the conclusion we got is, look, big companies are going to be built either way. Some companies are going to be remote, some companies are going to be in person. Each of them comes with a set of pros and cons and the pros for you need to be, outweigh the cons. We think that the ability to access global talent, hire people all over the world is worth almost any con. When we started remote, we thought it was going to be like, we're going to hire all people in big cities. For example, we opened hiring in Brazil and we thought it was going to be all in Sao Paulo part of the city. Honestly, there's only one person in Sao Paulo. All the other people we hired, they're like in these random places in Brazil that we would never have to opened an office. These people can now come and work for Brex. I think that's an amazing advantage. The cons is, you have to change everything about your business. You were operating in one way and now I have to change everything.

I'm a believer, you actually can make it better with remote than it was before in person. But you have to go through the process and the pain of iterating and changing everything about how you run your company. That's a huge, con. The bigger you are the harder that con is, because it might take time, it might not work. There's going to be inefficiency in the middle like things that just weren't working that well. You're going to have to iterate and adapt and fix it versus in person, you can just use a playbook. You can just go into like, "Oh, this is how this company has solved this. Let me just copy it and execute on it." In remote, there's no playbook. We're having to create it from scratch.

Patrick: [00:41:50] What have you learned about that recruiting pipeline? A hundred to 400 people is one example, hiring all over the world is the second example. This is the lifeblood of technology firms is talented people. How have you built a good pipeline there? What's been key to your success? What would you do differently if you had to redo it? It seems like hiring is just like an absolute critical thing to get right.

Henrique: [00:42:09] I think the most important thing for us is have a talent first culture, which is adapt your processes, adapt your stuff in order to have the best talent. I think a lot of times HR teams come in and they want to standardize everything and they want to make everything a process because it makes their life easier. I don't know, our head of people has been amazing about this, that he doesn't let administrative burden prevents us from doing the decisions that are the best to recruit talent. For example, we have a pretty unique comp model. When you come to Brex, you get a total comp offer, let's say 100 thousand dollars just to make a math, and you can choose how much equity, how much cash you want? You can choose, I want 90K cash, 10K equity. You could do 60k cash, 40K equity. You can make that split.

There's a lot of HR drama and administration and stuff that has to go with this. Our employees love it. It's a big differentiation in hiring because you value more what they want more, if someone needs more cash you can evaluate that more. If you want more stock, there's no pressure you're going to evaluate that more. It ends up that people just love that. A lot of companies can't compete with us because they have these like six bands that you can't go through. I think we were just very aggressive about let's just do whatever it takes to hire the best people. We're a super aggressive comp. We pay people really well. The reason is, I don't want to be in a situation in which there's someone that I want to recruit that's really good.

He's making more than everyone else on the team and that feels unfair. I'd rather, literally just pay people in the 90th percentile of the market or more to get the best people. I was making the point of R&D about, being expensive. It is, and it's true, but I think it's also what allows us to keep innovating for so long and building. We have four products now, that'd be impossible if we didn't have a lot of talented engineers building things and iterating and stuff like that. I think just having your entire culture, being around attracting the best person is doing... I think a lot of people say that, but there's a lot of actions in the day-to-day that make it so, that's true versus not.

Patrick: [00:44:05] In your seat obviously, a lot of this starts to become decision-making and recruiting. As you scale up, your job becomes almost more abstract versus doing individual contributor work. What have you learned about decision-making specifically? How have you become a better decision maker that you think might be a portable concept for others that want to follow in that path?

Henrique: [00:44:27] Well, again, giving credit to my co-founder here but, he helped us transition to a memo culture pretty early on. I hate it. I hate it, Oh my guts. I hate memos. I hate it. Now I like them but I was like, "Let's just get in a room and discuss and be verbal and talk about stuff." People would try to bullshit on the conference all the time. It's really hard to bullshit and write.

My co-founder said something that I think is true, which is writing memos is not just a memorialized decision it actually helps you make better decisions because it forces you to think in a way.

Look, Amazon's probably a pioneer of this and we're just following their footsteps, but you just make better decisions. I was talking to a fortune 50 CEO the other day about this, and he was saying, "Wow, but like, don't you lose a thing, and when just people are in a meeting and you say, Hey, what about this? Then they answer you, and you have this debate." I was like, "You actually want them to think before they answer you in a discussion." You don't want them to just come up with something on the fly because if they don't know it, it's really uncomfortable to say, "I don't know, let me go find out." They'll just make some shit up versus if they actually need to respond to a comment, they can do it async. They can take a couple of hours to find out the right answer. You will get a better answer. I think that the process helps decision-making.

Patrick: [00:45:39] What have you learned about convincing people of stuff? I don't want to even call it sales because sales implies winning a contract from a customer. As a business leader you're basically always convincing someone of something all day, every day. What have you learned about that skill set?

Henrique: [00:45:53] Someone told me this phrase early on about raising money that I think applies to any kind of sales or convincing, which is you don't really need to convince people that you're right. You just need to convince them that they're right, which I think is very true for investing. All people have these thesis and you finish the thesis, they love you because it proves that they were right and their LPs and they can go raise more money. A lot of times, fundraising is easier to prove that you're what they believe in than anything else and mash those two things. I think that's true for any kind of convincement of people. People have a set of preconceived beliefs. If you try to attack their core beliefs, it's not going to work versus if you understand where they're coming from, how they think about the world, then you show what you're trying to convince in a light that they believe. I think that then you have a much higher chance of succeeding. When we started Pagar.me Pedro was coding and I was coding too. Then he's like, "Henrique, your code is bad, go do something else." He told me to do sales. I had to go do sales and look, I was a nerd. I never sold people in my life. I only sold my girlfriend at the time that I was a good guy. That's the only sale I've done in my life. Basically, what I do, so I started reading Sales Bible, seemed like the right place to start.

I read this book, the Sales Bible, and I got in and it's like, look, the main mistake people do is they start just pitching everything. The right thing to do is you should ask questions first. You should understand where they're coming from. You should understand what they're looking for. You should understand everything about them before you say your first word about what you're pitching. I think that's extremely true for anything. You need to understand how people think and where they're coming from before you can try to convince them of anything. You really need to feed into their view of the world. If you try to fit into your view of the world they're just going to move on.

Patrick: [00:47:35] It's an incredibly powerful concept of just orientation right away from yourself and towards somebody else's situation. The inverse of this convincing might be difficult conversations to effectively build and move fast. What moments in the business, these days make you feel the most alive or the moments in which you're having the most fun?

Henrique: [00:47:54] Pedro and I are good friends, we're very complementary. I'm not like a big structure guy. I don't like process, I don't want to be in process as much. I don't like creating process, it's not my thing. Pedro loves process. He loves organizing stuff. Pedro's mode of happiness is, there's something like super chaotic and he creates some process and it becomes organized. He loves running the company a lot because he can create these systems and he can think about systems and incentives and stuff like that. He's extremely good about it and he's amazing at it. I like the new stuff. I like the new businesses, the new things coming on, the new customers, the new rounds. I like new stuff, exciting, less structure more creative things. I think historically or recently the things I've been liking the most has been, I think, new product initiatives that we're working on.

Every time there's a new cool big project, for example, we announced that we applied for a bank charter, I think earlier this year. It was a year work to get that thing through. I really like going and hiring, I hired Bruce Wallace. Bruce is amazing. He was the COO of SVB and there was a whole process of hiring him. I had a lot of fun getting to know him and hiring him. Then I was learning about all these new MDIC regulations and how these things work. How does it fit together? Writing an application, I think that was all awesome. I had a lot of fun doing it, and there's a few things like that, that we're working on right now and I have a lot of fun with them as well.

Life Philosophy
Patrick: [00:49:13] It reminds me of Will Thorndike's book, The Outsiders were often, you had this partnership pair at the top of the chaos person and the order person. The one opening up doors, the one structuring things was often this really effective one, two punch. Sounds like you guys have built something similar. What has you most excited about the future? Generally speaking, not even a Brex question, just in general. You're operating in something that's moving fast, the world's changing quickly. COVID accelerated that. What has you jazzed about the future?

Henrique: [00:49:43] None. I'm really, really excited about the changes that remote work will do to the world. I live in LA now. I always wanted to live in LA. I could never live in LA. I thought I was going to spend the rest of my life in San Francisco because that's where the company was and I'm having my best life. I live in LA. I work more than I worked when it was in person. I don't have to commute, I'm pretty focused. I can have dinner working and stuff, but on the weekends or even sometimes during the day, I go walk my dog in the street and I have a lot of joy doing that. That wasn't possibly for me.

I'm just having like the most amazing life post remote world and I'm just wonder like, someone within our team moved to Wyoming. They're working a ton from Wyoming but they always wanted to live their best life in the mountains and now they can. I'm extremely excited about what remote work is going to change about sales, is going to change about the way people live and just the overall happiness of everyone and the overall productivity of everyone as well.

Patrick: [00:50:39] Do you have a philosophy of business? Generally speaking, if you had to start from scratch, would there be a principle or a set of principles or philosophy that would drive what you went to do next?

Henrique: [00:50:50] Yeah, I think so. Our biggest inspirations in terms of business and our biggest mentors growing up were the founders of 3G capital. They own like Crab, Times, Burger King, ABI, like all these big businesses. They are all Brazilian, like a trio Brazilians. Growing up, they were like both our biggest inspirations because there's these Brazilians that made it outside of Brazil and also our biggest mentors. We were lucky to meet them early on in our career and gave me a lot of advice. I think we learned and got inspired a lot by their way. We just really like this idea. We've been called serial entrepreneurs.

That's very far from what we want to be. We just want to work on something for 30 years. Just get one thing, one problem set, and just work it for a long, long period of time and because we really believe in the power of compounding of being able to do something for a long period of time. What's the change and what's the scale you can do if you... something like that. I think this concept of just working on one thing for a long time and just being extremely ambitious. Our main value can be big, our first value. Copied from them again, your inspirations. If you just work on something for 30 years, if a really big dream of wanting to do really something amazing, it can have ginormous amount of impact in the world.

Patrick: [00:52:04] Can you say one little bit more about this notion of compounding and working on a single thing through time? What are the key nuances there that make that so interesting and attractive to you?

Henrique: [00:52:13] I think Marc Benioff probably said it the best that I've seen is, people overestimate what we can do in a year, but underestimate what you can do in a decade. I think that if you get a lot of smart people, like a lot of them, a lot of money and you put into a problem set for a long period of time, a lot of interesting things are going to be created. You look at a company like Salesforce, like the impact that they have in the side they have. I think if Marc had gave up or had left the company six, seven years in, you know, professional CEO and that wasn't maybe as excited as he is, it would be really hard to build what they built into the magnitude that they built. But because you had one person with one vision working on that vision for a long, long, long period of time, very impressive things can be built.

I think it's hard to do that if you don't have the mentality that you're going to do it for a long time, because then you don't make long-term investments, which is a problem of hired CEOs is, "Hey, we're making decisions at Brex today that we think are going to be valuable in 10 years." If I don't think in that horizon, I'm not going to make those decisions. Then the things that take a long time and a lot of effort is what changes the world. Just get Amazon as an example, if they didn't think that building warehouses and the delivery service and all the logistics, which is a very ugly part of the business.

Again, engineers just want to build software and let it run. Building warehouses and trucks and all these things are something that's going to take a long time to pay out but it's what allows me to get one day delivery.

It's only possible because they made that choice 10 years ago, thinking about, at some point it was going to be true. If you don't think of that time horizon, you can't build things that are hard enough to actually go change the world.

Patrick: [00:53:51] I'm sure that the centralized account that you've put all that effort into is one example of that, of something that's going to pay off for a long time. Is there any other decision, business decision that you've made, that's a good example of that 10 year thinking?

Henrique: [00:54:03] I think decisions that we make around infrastructure, there's a lot of stuff you say, "Hey, we could just use a vendor here or we could shortcut here." We just make a decision and a note. We're going to own this. It's going to be awesome. It's going to take longer. It's going to be more expensive right now, but eventually it's going to pay off. There's a lot of micro decisions like that, that happen in the day to day that we end up, especially in the infrastructure side that we end up. The other thing that I think we've done historically, and we're going to do even more is investing in our brand. Some investor came and told me and said, Hey, "Airbnb now is 93% organic traffic." I was like, "Yeah, after like 11 years of investing hundreds of millions in brands, I sure hope so."

I think that's something that we're going to invest a lot. Not because we think it's going to yield a lot of results this year or next year, but we have an amazing brand in 10 years. It's about to get strong as American express or Visa or MasterCard, Chase. I think that's going to be incredibly valuable. Maybe it's not going to make sense in '21. Maybe it's not going to make sense in '22, but eventually we're going to get there. If I don't think from that time horizon, I'm just saying the only thing that matters is showing my tack out to these investors right now, I'm never going to do stuff like this.

Patrick: [00:55:12] You mentioned Amazon. One of the most fascinating features of them is, they had never made money for a long time. They chose to do things a different way, but they we're always very cashflow positive. How do you think about that part of the business? Free cashflow generation, you came from Brazil where getting to profit was key. Talk me through your thinking and orientation on the financial side of the business and what your philosophy is there?

Henrique: [00:55:35] The way Pedro and I talk about this, is we have to have our own conviction of where the cashflow is going to come. We totally agree that free cash flow is the right measure for us. We have to have our own view of where that's going to come from and we just have to go there. For me, that means two different things. One is on unit basis, figuring out what do we think the LTV per customer is and where is it going to come from? For some segments we optimize like, look, this segment, we don't think we're going to be able to process all that much stuff or they're going to pay for that much stuff. We need to have like a pretty good tax LTV today, but some segments unless they get early stage startups, they're going to keep growing for a long time.

We can actually spend a lot of money to acquire these customers right now because some of them became Scale AI, they now make us a lot of money that pays off for the investment that we made in them over like first couple of years. It wasn't obvious that, that was going to be the case, are we going to be able to help the customer? But it was our own conviction that, that was going to be true and we were going to do it. I think it eventually goes, like having your own conviction about where the LTV of your customer is going to come from and operating your business in a longterm view. The second point is around SG&A, which is no one cares about SG&A. Kind of being, should we be burning 50 million in a year in SG&A, 100 million, 30 million, 200 million, like what's the right number? No one knows.

The way you think about it has evolved. I would separate SG&A in three parts, like everyone else does. Sales and marketing, R&D, G&A. Sales and marketing you're CAC bound. It goes into the first point I was doing. Absolute numbers don't matter. The matter is like, "Hey, what is the CAC/LTV, you also do math you're going to start marketing." G&A is, you have to gain leverage with it over time. You can have a high G&A but then over time, G&A divided by revenue, that number needs to gain efficiency because otherwise, like, what are you doing? Then you have R&D, which is the hardest one. It is the biggest one, and you can say it's an investment, you can say it's not an investment. I think in the R&D you just need to be very real with yourself, which is, "Am I producing products that are successful?" Because there are companies that huge R&Ds, but everything they launch fails.

That's horrible. You shouldn't be investing in R&D. There are companies that have huge R&Ds and they launch a lot of successful products. If that's the case, you should be investing for R&D for a long, long, long period of time. Honestly, almost the more the merrier, if you're hiring amazing people and they're producing more products, you should be doing that. Historically, you'd probably know this more than I do, but I heard that companies that invest a lot in R&D actually perform a lot better than companies that don't. I think that's how we think about it. It's like, we're very critical of ourselves. Like, "Hey, are we launching products that are getting traction or are we just kidding ourselves?" If we are, we should be investing and hiring more than me, if we're not, we should take a good look at what's going on before we hire more people.

Patrick: [00:58:18] It's an incredibly clean way to think about the business. Obviously, for you with owning the brain or operating system for B2B financial services, like the potential LTV is hard to probably figure out what that could be, because it could be so big. But the conviction is key. This has been so much fun. I've learned a ton about the business. I love the lessons you've learned at a shockingly young age. It's been really interesting to learn from you directly, but also too, in preparation for the conversation today, I ask everybody the same closing question, which is what is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Henrique: [00:58:49] George that I mentioned at the beginning, he paid for our college when we came to the US, so a lot of money, $60,000 a year. I'm happy though that we decided to repay him in Brex stock to his foundation. He can give a lot more scholarships with that money now, but I think it was super kind and we didn't know how we we're going to afford college and... very nice gesture.

Patrick: [00:59:09] Reminds me of Carlos Brito's story that he told on the show as well. I mean, amazing. It's incredible what they've done, especially just supporting people's education and it's so cool and love it as a closing anecdote. Thank you so much for your time. This has been a blast. Really appreciate it.

Henrique: [00:59:24] Thank you.

Created by @mercedeschien

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
