
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released November 11th, 2021
Web3 Breakdowns
Eric Golden - Bored Ape Yacht Club
Eric Golden is a former Portfolio Manager at Fidelity. We cover the Bored Ape Yacht Club in detail, use Bored Apes as a lens to understand how NFT projects are creating strong membership communities, and explore the tools projects are using to differentiate themselves.

00:00:00
00:51:27
Introduction
[00:01:39] Patrick: Welcome to our new show Web3 Breakdowns. We want to be your on ramp into this new decentralized world and through conversations with builders, creators, and investors, we'll do our best to help you understand and navigate this emerging ecosystem.

First up, we are breaking down the NFT project and cultural phenomenon Bored Ape Yacht Club. To help break down Bored Apes, I'm joined by Eric Golden, former portfolio manager at Fidelity and current Bored Ape owner. Eric and I start with an overview of the Bored Ape Yacht Club and his path to owning an NFT in the collection. We then use Bored Apes as a lens to understand how NFT projects are not just creating rare art, but strong membership communities too. Beyond the cultural differences between NFT communities, it was fascinating to hear how projects are differentiating themselves with IP ownership, roadmaps, and dows. Please enjoy this breakdown of the Bored Ape Yacht Club.

What Bored Ape Yacht Club Is
[00:02:29] Patrick: So Eric, we like to begin these things with just a simple overview of what the thing is. In this case, we're going to talk about the Bored Ape Yacht Club, my personal favorite example of just the madness and interestingness in the crypto world today. It's not a company, so usually we do companies, but we'll start the same way here with Bored Apes. Can you just give us a high level overview of like, what is this thing literally? Give us a couple numbers, a little bit of history. What is the Bored Ape Yacht Club? And then we'll dive into all the interesting details beneath the top level surface stuff.

[00:02:59] Eric: Thank you for having me. I'm glad you started off laughing because I can tell you this is going to be a little bit different than tearing apart a cashflow producing company. So the Bored Ape Yacht Club is a generative art collection in the space of PFP, which stands for profile picture. It started in April 21st is when the project came into being and sold out around May.

What these things are, are fun. 10,000 pictures of bored apes that have 170 different characteristics from spinner hats to gold fur, and each one of them is unique but part of the collection called the Bored Ape Yacht Club.

[00:03:39] Patrick: And if you think about the collection, so there's 10,000 of them. They're NFTs. People collect one or more of them. What are the motivations for owning one that are distinct from let's say a pure piece of art that you might show people but doesn't have a membership criteria to it. Like how is this something more, something different?

[00:03:56] Eric: So if you zoom out, I think for me of how I got into this, this is not what I thought I would be owning. I got into crypto late. And by late, I mean everyone who was after 2013, that seems to be a big demarcation. And so I was into crypto in 2018, 2019, and I was buying it to coins. I really didn't know much about it. But went on Twitter, most of the information was coming from Twitter and Discord. And on Twitter you would see these CryptoPunks, and I really wanted a CryptoPunk, and you would go in their Discord, and I was lusting after these things. I was looking at them and saying like, "I just want one." But when I went into the Discord and I met these people, they'd been in Bitcoin since like 2010, they own Glitz. They just knew everything. And I felt like such an imposter. I was like, "I'm new to space. I'm just trying to get skin in the game to understand it." And I really didn't feel like I would belong.

And so when the Bored Ape project happened, it had come right after Top Shot. So Top Shot came out at the end of '19. I got big into that in the beginning of 2020, and people were trading basketball cards, and it really was this first experience with NFTs and Roham Gharegozlou, the founder of Dapper Labs, gets a huge amount of credit of onboarding us into what is an NFT.

And so at that point, ironically in April, Larva Labs was about to issue their second project called Meebits, and I actually bought two of those. And I thought it was the most ridiculous thing I could ever do. I minted a human and a pig. A pig was very rare, and I showed my wife and I'm like, look, we just minted a digital cartoon and parents of a new pig. And I'm like, you can trade this thing for like $30,000. This whole thing crazy. And I put it up as my avatar, and I was trying to make this personality and just play around in the space. And the Apes were like taunting me. And they were this new project. They started off at $200. Meebits came out at like the equivalent of $8,000.

And so this was kind of a blue collar project that it had a vibe and a culture I wanted to be a part of. And so I ended up buying some Bored Apes and joining the group and joining the Discord and learning more about it. And I would say for a lot of people, especially I bought it in May, so it was a one month after launch. It was kind of this silly thing, which was like, we wanted to be punks, but we weren't punks. And we bought this picture of an ape, and it was this fun lore of what would happen if everyone got rich from investing in crypto, what you end up doing, you would create this really cool bar and club to go hang out with your friends, which resonated with a lot of people. Like you're working really hard. You want to make a lot of money, but what's it all for? It's just to go hang out with your friends.

And so this culture war started between Meebits and Apes, and we were joking about it, what group you were going to join. It was all very playful and fun. We were watching the price of their project, which is quoted in floors. So floor is the cheapest you can buy something at. There's was two ETH, and ours was 0.3ETH, and we're like, "Someday we're going to cost more than Meebits." And we would just joke about it in the Discord and talk about what this project could be. And so it really wasn't on buying a piece of art. I think this is beautiful. I want to hang it on my wall, although I did really like it. It was more symbolic of joining a community and having a shared belief of the people who were on the frontier that are willing to fail unconventionally, but came into crypto around the same time.

We weren't the CryptoPunks. We weren't the first to get there, but we were totally okay with that. We were this new group that really wanted to have fun and teach each other. There's another famous podcast that always asks what's the kindest thing. And I really felt like the Bored Ape Yacht Club exemplified that. When you went into the Discord, you're like, "I don't know what DeFi is. What is Solana and why do all the VCs own it?" It was just this amazing sharing community where with my ape, I could speak in a way that immediately got me into a circle of people I wanted to associated with and I wanted to learn from. And it was really a club, not a piece of art where I was going to say, I own this rare thing. I'm going to hang on my wall.

[00:07:46] Patrick: It's a really helpful backstory because I think so much of what's interesting about this project in particular, but maybe NFTs writ larger is the community function. That all of a sudden these digital assets, these scarce digital assets, become membership cards, like a unique brand of membership card. And I'd love you to talk through that in a little bit more detail.

So first I want to flesh out there's 10,000 of these things you said. I think there's 170 attributes. Just give people a sense of the scope today. Like, what is the price for today? How much should they get traded? Is there a lot of turnover in them? What the hierarchy of rarity? What's the spread between the cheapest and the most expensive, and how is that determined? Like just a little more meat on the bones of the hierarchy. Because I think these details are the things that the community latches onto as things to talk about, and it's like watching sports or something, right? It's the detail that makes it come to life. So give us a little bit more of that detail

[00:08:37] Eric: Today, there's been 15 ape sales. I watch it pretty closely. Ironically, we couldn't be recording this at a better time because the record was just broken that a Trippy. If you look at it online, it's an ape fur that looks like a hippy trippy tie dye skin, with a crown and heart sunglasses just sold for $2.7 million. Now that's unusual. I mean, it's actually not last week. We had two mutant sales, which we'll get into which each went for 1.4 million. But today the cheapest ape you can buy where it's just 35ETH, but based on each price action, that's about $140,000 to $150,000 give or take. So that's the cheapest you can get.

There are bids for over 1,000ETH on some of the gold, the rarest apes, and the most desired. And so I would say people looked at the class system that I developed with CryptoPunks, where you had aliens, which were the rarest of the rare and then different levels. And so you've got this, a lot of the ways these PFPs start to price, you can think of a pricing curve as there's a floor, which means generic, nothing special, and then there's a mid, and then there's a steep function for the rarest ones. And so those ones go from at this point, now we're talking about multiple millions of dollars for one of these things.

[00:09:51] Patrick: And if you think about the activity that this distribution of rarity creates in the community, talk to me a little bit about that. Like how does that matter, and why does it matter other than like bragging rights or status signaling and maybe that's the whole function.

[00:10:05] Eric: So these prices have gotten astronomically high very quickly. If I rewind back to the fun part, there was a cheetah fur and a DMT fur, and the DMT fur is this psychedelic fur. And they started these gangs called the cheetah gang versus the DMT gang. And like we're all for the, I mean there's some teenagers, everyone's anonymous for the most part. So it's a wide group of people.

But like the cheetah gang was threatening the DMT gang, and so you kind of have these like subgroups established. And then they would create their own Discord. So I'm part of a Discord called the Rare Apes Club, which is club owners that own some of either they own a collection of apes where they own a bunch of them that equal a significant investment, and or they own some of these rare ones. And the reason why that's helpful is a lot of the largest transactions are happening between counterparties that are off OpenSea.

If you listed on the exchange, maybe it will get priced there. But a lot of their rare age will trade amongst the group of people who know that they want to sell something for several million dollars. This is still early to give you numbers. I just saw Galaxy's report, and I think they have OpenSea has 70,000 active daily wallets. So people have quoted the space at 300,000, but you have 70,000 people doing this or at least wallets using it, the amount of people that are going to spend $2.7 million on a rare ape is a small universe right now. And so for trades like that to happen, you really need to know who is the buyer base who would actually want to collect something like this?

Community Owned Roadmap
[00:11:29] Patrick: Let's talk now about the value of holding these things beyond the purely digital. They release this thing called Roadmap 2.0, and again, I want to come back to, there's a difference between owning a piece of art, say in the extreme you own the Mona Lisa, that's incredibly valuable. Maybe it appreciates over time. It's a piece of culture. There's all sorts of interesting art specific angles that we'll probably cover more in other episodes. But in this one I'm really interested in sort of the membership and community specific angle. So how is this organically, this roadmap managed, how does the community contribute to it? Are you excited about it? What do you think this might become if each of these 10,000 things is effectively like a membership card into a club?

[00:12:11] Eric: Roadmap 1.0 was a scavenger hunt where we were going to give away an ape and also a certain amount of ETH. So the first Roadmap was pretty basic, but the big finale was releasing of the mutant apes, which really was a way of extending the club. So if there was 10,000 people that were part of the original, they had always planned to make that number in total 30,000. But was we really fascinating was the way they went about distributing the second batch of the 20,000. And what was interesting about it is most of the wealth of the money paid for those mutants went to original owners, and some went to the Bored Ape Yacht Club founders themselves.

So there was this economic thing where they delivered to original holders Serum, and that Serum, if you combined it with your ape, would create a new mutant ape, and then you could sell that. But you got that for free. The value of that the day it was dropped in U.S. dollars was between 15 and $60,000. So everyone who owned an ape just got 15 to $60,000. And that came on the heels of us already getting a Bored Ape dog, which we could have sold for probably 15 to 20,000.

And so if you were in early, you've been paid back your investment already through the airdrop mechanisms, which we can talk about some more. What the Bored Ape Yacht Club itself raised, the actual founders raised something like $90 million in that second sale. Combine that with the fact that one of the interesting things about how NFTs sell is every time a transaction happens, the Bored Ape Yacht Club gets 2.5 per percent and a royalty. So if you have a million dollar sale, you have $25,000 going into the kitty. And so these numbers are wild, but since April, they've done over a billion dollars in sales and raised over a hundred million dollars in revenue for this organization to do what it will with.

And so you asked the question, there's kind of two parts. One thing that made Bored Apes unique was they let the owners take the IP. So I own my ape. I can start a beer company, a coffee company. We can start the Bored Investor Yacht Club together. There's all of these things that you can do because you own your own ape. Roadmap 2.0 right now is literally just a picture teasing out a lot of different things. And so the first thing that's coming out is called Ape Fest in New York, which I'll be attending, where we literally rented a yacht to go out on the Hudson River for a thousand of our friends to hang out. A lot of us have never met each other. We're also throwing a huge party in Brooklyn, and there's a bunch of other activities happening for this week. So that's kind of the first meetup in real life.

And then there's teasing at things that people are guessing about or speculating. You can pull the picture up. One is a game, which a lot of people are talking about, like a game that group could play and things that we own, we have some sort of part in that as assets. The other that I'm most excited about is it looks like there could be an actual bar in Miami. The funny thing is this meme becoming a reality. We were joking about what would happen if this all took off. Imagine we had our own Yacht Club where we would just hang out at a bar together. And in fact, that might actually happen, and we're going to build one. And then the next one was DOW, which has really become, I think, going to be the big, next thing in crypto. It's been around for a while. But I think that it's gaining steam of, okay, if you bring all these people together, how do we think about governance? How do we think about what we do with the money?

And so if you become a member of the Bored Ape Yacht Club, your voice, you can go into the discord. You can say, "This is what I want to do." People will work together to say, "I want to do this on my own, or try to make recommendations of what actually the Yacht Club should do." So, yes, I'm extremely excited about Roadmap 2.0. I never really thought there would be anything past Roadmap 1.0, to be honest. I thought we would do this. We would trade it. It would be this iconic thing you own that, when you looked back at time, you'd say, "Okay, when NFTs became the mainstream onboarding to crypto," which I really believe NFTs will do, "Bored Ape Yacht Club had a really strong place in how that all happened.

But the brand and the strength has gotten so powerful, they've actually been able to generate something I think far beyond anyone's wildest streams, where now we're comparing it to Ferrari and Rolex and Supreme and saying like, "This is going to be an international, global brand. And how do we handle this and what do we do with it?" Far more than I think what we could have imagined at the onset.

[00:16:23] Patrick: Say a bit more about how that's all governed today. I'm sure it's less than 10,000 people since a lot of people own more than one, or maybe it's less than 30,000 since there's the Mutant off spin. But let's say it's 20,000 people that own one of these things are, quote unquote, members. Is it the original fore founders that are basically still the stewards of this brand? Decentralization is very nice sounding, but in the end, most things centralize. Power accrues to a small subset of a user base, et cetera, et cetera. How does that work today? Who carries the flame, so to speak, for this brand?

[00:16:54] Eric: Yeah. So according to OpenSea, there's 15,000 unique members across the 30,000. So on average, people have two. The fore founders, who are anonymous but have really fun names, they're in charge of steering the ship. What's interesting about how Web3 works is the consumer owns the asset. So have this unique alignment of incentives. If you think about a company that sold a thousand things and the price went from $200 to $150,000, any company today would say, "We need to issue more supply." We can sell a million of these things.

But what's unique about how this worked is that there's this view of we as owners want the assets to appreciate, and we want there to be value. And the founders are getting a benefit when there is turnover or there's a trade in the membership as new people come in, or as someone sells something for $2.7 million, they benefit from the ongoing transactions of the actual underlying assets. What's interesting to me is the fore founders are completely in charge of where we're going, but the community has, I feel like an owner in it more than I feel like I just bought an asset and I own an avatar in a video game. I really feel like I'm part of something much bigger than myself.

[00:18:07] Patrick: If you think about some of the mechanics behind this, I think it's really important to dive into the details. The thing that really sparked my interest is this notion of IP ownership. So that leads me to believe that there are other profile picture projects or other NFT projects where that's not the case, where you don't own the IP. Just walk through that fork in the road. So what's an example of one where it's not owned by the owners? Seems contradictory. Talk me through the implications of one versus the other.

[00:18:33] Eric: So I've talked to a couple of legal friends about this, and right now I have three frameworks that we've learned about. The first was when Larva Labs, who's the creator of CryptoPunks, first launched them, I believe that they kept the copyright to themselves and they made some changes. But essentially it's something like Larva Labs holds the copyright to the project. I think there's pros and cons to all of these. What that means is Larva Labs can do a deal with a Hollywood agency and say, "Use these." But then they also licensed the CryptoPunks to the owners to use, and I think there's some fine trend of up to a hundred thousand dollars in value. And that was the original NFT connection between the creators and the owners. It was a copyright owned by the parent and then licensed to the owners. When Bored Apes came around, its first big addition to the NFT space was they just said, "Let's give all the IP rights to the owners."

So you own your ape, and the Bored Ape Yacht Club what they retained was you can see we're on a podcast, but they own the logo of Bored Apes. They own the Bored Ape brand, the parent brand. So I can't go create a hoodie with this logo on it, but I can create as many hoodies as I want with my apes on them and sell them and do what I please. And so that was a third version and there's been a third version, I forget what they call it. But basically this one is just, the whole thing is just given to the community. Do whatever you want. There's no rules, there's no nothing. You want to create something, nobody owns anything, just full distribution. And so I think where we've discussed it, which has become interesting, is there's been people in traditional finance or other people on Twitter that have done this thing of copy and paste a picture to kind of say, "This is all foolish."

And there's this view of, well, how does the property rights work? Do I have to go after every person that copies my ape? And the truth is, you do, but the community gets really upset when that happens and will actually go or Twitter and be like, "They're impersonating me." Whereas with CryptoPunks, there was a project that just took a punk and flipped it from right to left, from left to right. They just mirrored the image. As angry as it was and as silly as that sounds, Patrick, it got me into this fascinating thing of like, what is art and what is creation and what happens when people are inspired by other people? But in that case, CryptoPunks was able to represent their entire brand, go to OpenSea, and say, "Take it down." And so we're still in this experimentation play phase of how are property rights being transferred to the owners and what are they doing with them? And we have a couple of frameworks that I'm sure we'll see more as more projects come online.

Mapping Old Models into this New World
[00:20:56] Patrick: So one of the things that I'm always curious about in anything is, what is the fundamental behind the asset? And beautiful thing about Bitcoin or gold is there is none, it's a collective story or an agreement that grows or doesn't or whatever. And so price is kind of untethered beyond just the imaginations of donors. Whereas something like Ethereum that gets used a lot or Solana that gets used a lot or, in this case, Bored Apes, relative to, say, CryptoPunks that seem to have much less going on in their ecosystem. You can map their value onto some underlying thing that's not just price speculation and supply and demand.

So how do you think about that as an owner? Do you care? These things are worth a lot of money today. It would be unsurprising if they were worth 5% of that amount in two months or something for some reason, because there's not a huge amount of underlying fundamentals. So as someone interested in NFTs, how do you think about that concept of earnings equivalent or cashflow equivalent or, I don't know what the unit of fundamental is, but how do you begin to map old models onto this new world?

[00:21:56] Eric: I think it's really hard and it's a question I ask myself every day looking at the prices. When CryptoPunks was released, it was released with no roadmap. That's been a big distinction of like, we're just putting these out to the world very much like Bitcoin. When Bored Apes showed up, they said, "We're going to do something." And there was a question of, what are you actually going to do? And so I think that, when I look at valuation, I would caution people that this is still wild speculation, people playing with what's possible. But Bored Apes is by far the group that has my attention of delivering and actually building a brand and has a lot more plans for the future. And where they've accumulated all this money, now it becomes an execution. So without any venture capital, they've generated over a hundred million dollars on their balance sheet to do a what they will.

And you have a very passionate, loyal community. I think of Chris Dixon's 1,000 True Fans just hit me. I was like, "Oh, I totally get it." Where you've got 15,000 people of which there's definitely thousands of extremely loyal fans that want to see what's possible. And so I don't think people are doing discounted cashflow analysis on their ape. I think they're comparing them to other assets, if anything, and doing relative value. That's what I'm doing. And saying, "When I first came into this space, I wanted a punk that's our gold or our treasury we're basing stuff off of." And how much should a Bored Ape be in relation to a punk? How should a Bored Ape be in relation to a piece of art like Dmitri's Ringers? And so you're comparing it to other assets.

The interesting thing is that they actually have, like with the airdrop mechanism, they actually did start to generate cash flow, but I'm not thinking that's going to be a professional thing. I think that's a one time thing, because then you get to how this suddenly does start to slip for people to feel like ponzis, where you're like, "Oh, I've constantly got to issue a new thing, to issue a new thing." And I can see why people are massively skeptical, which they should be. But I think that the brand is actually going to be able to build out IP that will be valuable. And I think that we're getting into a space that's fascinates me because at your conference where Mauboussin was talking about intangible value. And it's so hard for a good analyst to put that on a balance sheet. As a former portfolio manager, you're trying to value companies, and intangibles is where all of the value's going, but we have no good accounting metrics. And what I'm telling you is I'm buying intangible value.

I don't know how to measure this yet. And I don't think we have the words or the measurement at mechanisms. We're just not at a place where you can say like, "Oh, well that's what it does." NFTs are starting to get into DeFi, which everything just feels like you're going towards this asset unlock using markets for price discovery. And you're starting to see NFTs just into the DeFi space. So with that, I think you might be able to do a little bit more of a traditional, but I don't think we've figured out yet what's the best approach to value these things. And so if anyone asks, I usually don't talk about this stuff, and here I am on your podcast because I don't want people to think you just buy it for $200, it goes to 150,000. Eric just DMed me the next project where that's going to happen. We could walk away. It's still a very speculative asset class.

[00:24:58] Patrick: What do you mean by NFTs are going into DeFi? What does that mean?

[00:25:01] Eric: So what that means is, what I'm interested is a new NFT project comes on. I'm very interested in what new aspect is it adding? We've seen the social status showing people, hey, I was earlier, I owned this really value asset. Clearly this is entertaining. The question is utility. What type of utility can these things bring? And so utility, to me, is innovation on the prior projects. There was a project, I don't know who the first one to do it was, but the one that's by far the most popular or the most successful is called CyberKongz.

And what CyberKongz did was, when you bought one of their NFTs, you started earning tokens for every period of time you held it. So if you held it for a week, you got X amount of tokens. And then after you saved up enough tokens, you could then create the next tier of the membership. And so why that's really interesting is it's incentivizing people to hold for longer periods of time. And then you had this economic value. You knew that if I held it for X amount of weeks, I could collect enough tokens. With those tokens, I could create and NFT and sell it.

And so then with tokens, now you can start to create liquidity pools, you can get into staking. You can do all of the things that people are doing in the DeFi space, but connected to an NFT instead of connected to a token. Now, I say that with all of the caveats I can, that what's been really interesting about this next step into DeFi is this question of, are these securities? Are you going to have regulation? What are you stumbling into from the silly art community, this is a fun project to, "Oh wow. I have a cashflow producing asset. Was that supposed to be registered with the SEC?"

[00:26:36] Patrick: Let's talk about fungible tokens in non fungible projects. If DeFi starts to become a part of or traditional fungible cryptocurrency start to be a part of these communities, how do you think that works in some detail? I think they actually even announced plans to do this a couple weeks ago within the Bored Ape Yacht Club. So let's say there's an Ape token. How do you think about that as a new element of this ecosystem that's being built?

[00:27:03] Eric: I'm really excited about it. When CyberKongz took off, then there were several other projects that all issue tokens, and all of the NFTs with tokens started to go stratosphere. Everyone started to rise. And so like everything in this type of space, a meme got created called when token, because everyone's like Bored Apes, what are you going to do? Everyone was waiting. And this is where I really respect the founders is they're not out there pumping their project. They're not telling you, "Do this, do that." They were really quiet. Every time they've been quiet, they've been heads down actually building. But the pressure I'd gotten pretty big of people asking, "Are we going to get a token too?" They announced they were working with two of the top law firms in the space to do this right. It basically assured everyone that, again, Bored Apes is a bit of a leader in this space of being like, "If we're going to do something, we're going to do it."

Right. And so that put my fears to rest of like, "Okay, these aren't just issuing a token and be like, oh, we'll figure out the regulation later." They're actually being very thoughtful with every move they make. At first, I was like, "Oh, all this ICOs from 2017, this seems bad." It was giving me a bad feeling. But the more I dug in and talk to different people in the group, as well as outsiders of what it could actually be used for, I think it's possible you can imagine having a token that you could use in the real world as well as in the metaverse. I think that's extremely interesting. So if in fact we have a club and the club has a hotel room, imagine if the only way to stay there was to use currency purchased in this ecosystem.

And so Patrick wants to go Miami and stay at the club, just like if you went to York and stayed at the Yale Club and you would need a reference from someone who's there, you could go to the Yacht Club, and the way you use membership was you had X of tokens to actually go and use it in the real world. I think you'll also see it in this idea of the metaverse, which is an overused term, but this notion of, if you want digital assets or you want to add to what's possible in the game or sandbox or these other places you could play around, that that currency could be used in a way that helps you interact with either your avatar or games or the places you're going to interact or walk around.

[00:29:06] Patrick: There's a quote from one of the anonymous founders whose pseudonymous name is Gargamel, and he said, "Your Ape is your Amex black card," and that sounds like what you're getting at here, that the combination of your membership token, we'll call it, that's non-fungible, your unique ape, with some sort of fungible currency, would be the two assets that mattered in this ecosystem. And the utility becomes the things we talked about earlier. The club in Miami, the ability to do all this different stuff, perhaps partial ownership of a Supreme-like brand that the brand itself becomes valuable and you have participation in it. I like that phrase, your Ape is your Amex black card. Any other ways that we should think about that?

[00:29:42] Eric: I want to take a side story real quick because I love it. One of the Apes created an Amex black card with your Ape on it. So one of the members literally created, where I was a little bit nervous, I haven't done it, but I definitely want one. Because you're handing your credit card number over to a company, but they're making what it's like an Amex black card, but then instead of having the Spartan warrior in the middle, you have your own Ape laser etched on it, and it's an actual credit card.

[00:30:07] Patrick: It's an actual physical card.

[00:30:08] Eric: Physical card. After Gargamel said that, someone went out and built it. I don't know where I've ever existed with this type of innovation and energy to just do what you want to do and create these things. And it's such a positive group of people that were like, "That's a really good idea. My Ape should be my black card." And now, you can make your ape your black card. And so I just think it's a wonderful story about people actually just going out and doing the things that they want. And that wasn't sponsored by the group. It came from Gargamel's quote.

Minting Mechanics
[00:30:36] Patrick: I want to go back to a little bit of the mechanics of this world, and this will be a bit of abstracted away from just Bored Apes, but you've done a nice job in the past explaining to me what some of these terms mean and how, if there's going to be a lot more of these projects, there seems to be a lot more demand than supply right now so I'm sure we'll see more, how it actually works. So the first is this concept of minting. It makes sense to me to go on a website and send some cryptocurrency to pay for Bored Ape in a secondary market. That's like any other asset I would buy. But in terms of origination and how these things come into being, describe this to us. What are the different paths that project creators have pursued? What do you think are the pros and cons of those paths? Just walk us through this minting, origination concept for NFTs.

[00:31:18] Eric: I would say four different versions, big iterations. There's traditional minting, Dutch auction minting, mint passes, and whitelisting is the newest one. So the original minting, which is what Bored Apes did, is it's just called free and fair. And they posted on their website. Maybe they announce it. Maybe they don't. But back then, projects didn't sell it right away and they said, "Okay. Hey, at this time on this day, you can come on. And if you pay us 0.08 Eth, you're going to mint and create an NFT in that moment." And you go on and you would create one. Now, if we look at what ended up happening as projects got more popular, your passport Apes, when you would go on and you would pay your 0.08 Eth, you would find yourself in what's called a gas war. Because most of the NFTs right now, greater than probably 95% are on Ethereum.

And there's other networks that do this, but most of it's on Ethereum. And so at that moment in time, oh, I'm like, "I think this is a great project." And Patrick is a great project, but there's only 10,000. And so what ends up happening is you'll say, "I'll pay more gas in Ethereum to move up the line to make sure I get one of those 10,000 projects ." What ended up happening was you had these evolutions of other projects where people like Meebits did a Dutch auction. And that was pretty popular in art blocks, where you'd start at a really high number, three Eth and say, "If you want to pay up, go ahead. You'll guarantee it. But if you of weight, the number will slowly decrease and you can buy it for less." Mint passes was a way of saying, "Okay, I'm going to sell an NFT and try not to have a gas," even though they still caused them.

And then at a later date, you could burn your mint pass for a new item. And whitelist is the newest one, which is my least favorite actually of all of them, where you get added to a list and those people have access to the mint, and there's a lot of question over who gets to decide who's on the list. But after you mint it, so let's just say you use a traditional method, you have a minting date, everyone goes in, there's a gas war. There's going to be 10,000 tokens distributed. There's a couple of paths that I can take. One is if it's generated on chain and one of it's if it's off chain.

And so this is another issue that people were worried about at first, where when you do an off chain mint, there can be a period of time between minting and reveal. So there's a question over, is there any funny business? Did the data leak out? So you bought this NFT and at first, you see nothing. You see a general image. In the case of Bored Apes, I think it was a skull. And then you're wait for reveal day. And on reveal day, all the attributes suddenly appear and you can see what you own. So there's a lottery like game to it where people love minting. Because if you went in on the Bored Ape mint, you paid 0.08 and you got a gold fur Ape.

Even on day one, that was going to be worth multiples more than a floor Ape. So back to our rarity, there's a fun part about minting that's a bit more of the speculation lottery of, "Oh, I really hope I get one." And so what ends up happening is after mint, the price usually goes up for an exciting project because there's a positive EV associated with, what are the odds of actually getting one of those rarer ones? And then right after reveal, the price plummets. And for new people, this is not an exciting experience, because you're like, "Oh, it's doing great. I don't even know what it is," and then it crashes. And that first crash is the EV being taken out, the expected value, that, "Oh, I didn't get the rare one. So what's the floor worth?" I just sell at the floor and then a floor gets established and then you start to figure out how much the rarities actually cost.

[00:34:36] Patrick: Talk a little bit more, even in greater detail, about minting, literally what is happening. So you're sending 0.08 Eth. Where is that going? How is that being sourced? Where does the picture itself live? Some live on chain, some live off chain. Literally what is happening from a flow of bits standpoint when something is minted?

[00:34:56] Eric: So you are connecting your wallet typically via a website, like you mentioned, and that website is then... When you log on, you're signing a contract. And that contract is saying, "I'm allowing my wallet to interact with this contract." And by sending 0.08 Eth to that contract, the contract's saying, "In exchange, if you're one of the 10,000 people, we'll deliver you a token and that token will be a unique identifier." So if you own token 3,204, that's your token. The next question is, what is token 3,204 actually equal? When you have stuff that was generated on chain, which means that the actual contract, the actual token has some, if not all, of the descriptive data or the actual image, that's considered the most secure because it's all on chain. The problem with it, as people have learned with studying different blockchains, is that takes up a lot of space.

And so if we put all of the art on chain, every time we move it around, it's really expensive and cost prohibitive. And so people came up with the pointing to a decentralized server, in this case, IPFS, where you're actually linking to another server. And that server holds the image. Now, this has gotten people worried in the past. You'd go through, for anyone who's not crypto, but is, we call it FUD, which is fear, uncertainty, and doubt. And everyone freaks you out and says, "Oh my God, you bought a website link. That's really silly." And you're constantly told, "This is the dumbest thing you've ever done," which is a self selecting process of, how far in the frontier do you want to go?

I personally love it. So IPFS is a decentralized server where you can store the image. There's another service called Airweave, where people have started to download and protect their assets, because they're afraid, what happens if the link gets changed? What happens if the service goes down? I don't actually own it. And so that cause, for some buyers, they'll only buy on chain art, independent of what it looks or what it does, but you lose a lot of the flexibility if we're going to stay on Ethereum. With what you can actually build, unless you do something like I described, that Bored Apes did.

[00:36:58] Patrick: And the other example you gave earlier of you as a Bored Ape owner got serum, and the mixing of serum in your Bored Ape created one of these mutant apes. Again, is that just all mediated the same way? There's some smart contract That's just like, if you press a button on a website or something, the thing happens and then your wallet is filled this new token?

[00:37:18] Eric: That was super cool, and that was an innovation that they had been working on from the beginning. The Bored Ape dogs that were gifted really just were shocked that this is going so well. How do we repay the community? That wasn't on the roadmap. Then mutants, they were working on since the beginning and that was super cool. And so what happened was, if you were an ape holder, you got one of three serums, M1, M2, or Mega.

So there was going to be 20,000 total mutants created. 10,000 were going to be part of a public sale. 10,000 were going to be distributed to the existing 10,000 holders. And so if you got M1, there was going to be 7,500 M1s, 2,500 M2s, and eight Megas. And everyone was excited that technically, you could take any ape and the ape could mutate three times. So if you had a gold ape, you could make your original gold ape. Then you could make the M1 gold ape, the M2 gold ape, and possibly the Mega.

When the serum came out, it was really saying just to play with the assets where you could keep the serum and keep your ape un-mutated. So people were saying, "Oh, I wonder if my un-mutated ape will be more valuable if everyone mutates and mines a virgin." And then people are like, "No, I want to collect the whole set. I want to have my original, my M1 and my M2. And I want to put them all together and keep them as a bundle." And so people were playing with it differently.

But what the mechanics were, as on the website, when you went on there, you connected your wallet, you said, "This is the ape I want to mutate." You connected it with another NFT. And then combination of those NFTs created a third NFT. So it was a new mechanism that allowed you to actually mint the third one, but there was no gas war. There was no trouble with it because we had been air dropped the serum. So the beauty is if people look back at their original owners and say, "Okay, the owners are going to get first crack," that might not be the best way to open it up to people. So there was the public sale. But using the serum through an air drop allowed everyone to get this. And then today you can go by serum if you want and mutate your Ape, but it hasn't all been done yet. Some people are still sitting on their serum and waiting to either sell it or use it in the future.

[00:39:19] Patrick: One of the things that's so interesting about this story is the inversion of, usually in the world of business first comes product, then comes distribution, then comes success. Sometimes businesses have started with distribution, build new products and had success that way. This seems to be the first example of, I like the term bottom-up brand. That first comes community that's boot strapped into existence. The community then starts doing stuff, it's sort of headless. There's the four guys, of course, who I think are stewards. But the black card example is a great one. What other examples of this bottom-up brand concept are the most interesting to you in terms of what you've seen in the Bored Ape Yacht Club so far? And any thoughts on just that as a big trend?

[00:40:01] Eric: Yeah, I think that there's definitely been lots of people testing and being entrepreneurial with their Apes and trying to make things happen. I think one of the things that caught me off guard was the celebrity status. In two ways. The first is celebrities joining the club and being able to talk to them like normal people. That was a big shock to me. I had made a post about how I'm a huge fan of Derrel Maury. And I knew he was collecting on NFTs. And so Cuban was joking about something. And I said I made a bet that Derrel is smarter than Cuban, and I'll go buy a Bored Ape before Mark Cuban did. And sure enough then Darrel retweeted at my silly anonymous account, "I already own one." And then Cuban quickly followed on. It's like, when are you going to be able to talk to people like that?

Steph Curry joined. Dez Bryant, Shaquille O'Neal. And they came into the discord like normal people. It wasn't their handlers saying, "How do we get access to it?" It was just a person joining a club, and everyone went crazy. Because you were interacting with some people's greatest heroes and these celebrities coming in. The other side of that coin, which has happened, which again is surprising. But again, it's similar to that black card status. Is if you're a black card holder, other vendors want access to who the black cardholders are. You want to show them, hey, these people have assets are willing to take risks.

What's interesting in the NFT space is with your Ape, we've gotten free drops from other creators just to get the stamp of approval that if the Bored Apes like it, maybe this project has legs. So it's served in a way that I never anticipated of every day someone says, "Oh, it's scary because it is all decentralized." And people are like, "Check your wallet, you get this free token." And you're like, "Maybe I do." But someone did, and I get nervous about that a little bit, of a great way to scam people because these things are very expensive. But you do get access to a lot of different things.

Investing Lens
[00:41:50] Patrick: We've talked mostly about the neat aspects of all this, and much less about the investing side, the potential for earning, let's say a cold rational return. And not caring at all whether you hold onto an Ape for a day or a year. To view them as trading vehicles, let's say. Which, people love to gamble, people love to trade. Do you think that there's room for an NFT investment story? That sounds like there really aren't those today, there's crypto investment firms. I'm not aware of any major firm where it's a fund and it's just buying and selling NFTs. Is that just gambling to you? And if not, how do you think this evolves as these things becoming investments? Just like you might describe art as an investment or some other collectible as an investment, or some other utility security as an investment. I'm just curious, since you come from the investing world, how you view this through that lens versus this great community lens that we've spent most of the conversation on.

[00:42:47] Eric: I believe that there's one major issue. But before I get to the issue, I'll split up into three categories. I believe you could create an NFT fund and do a buy and hold on really what are considered the blue chip or historically significant pieces of work in this space. And if you're betting on Web 3, being a big deal, and you also believe that NFTs will be the big onboarding to mainstream into this world, that you could build a portfolio and lock it up, and wake up in 10 to 20 years and it could have significant value if you're right about that. I believe there's an ability to trade the assets coming from the fixed income markets. It's an over the counter market. And this is much similar. The bid ask spread right now on Bored Ape is probably 35 Eth someone will sell it, and someone will buy it for probably 30, maybe 20.80. So the bid ask spread is five to seven Eth, which in today's dollars is 20 to $30,000.

Now this is not the most liquid, but when you're used bid ask spreads and ticks, you can drive a truck through this. So clearly you have, in a liquid small market, and there's opportunities to trade assets. But by and large, it is speculative. And a lot of people are betting on the next project or the next thing to go up. And people are playing it like a lottery, and there's a lot of gambling. And so it definitely has those properties. And I think the risk is that we talk about it, about going down the rabbit hole. If I was sitting in my old seat with my full-time job looking at this, I would say, this is crazy. All gambling, and it's insane." And while that's a lot of it, I think that the gamblers are the ones that are willing to try if they see that there's an edge.

People can have careers in daily fantasy sports. When we were going to high school, I never thought that would be a real thing. And so you definitely can speculate in the space, and a lot of it is gambling. But I believe we're seeing the formation of a new asset class. And so I believe that the experimentation is going to lead to more utility in the form of, I think gaming is the big one that's coming. It's already here. Axie, and Zed. But I think we're going to see more and more introductions of play to earn gaming, which is going to onboard a lot of folks. And then I think the next level is seeing in real life utility of what you can actually use these things for. It's going to become more ubiquitous, where people going to be like, "We used to buy tickets to a sporting event, and then we had to print out PDFs, and then we had QR codes. But why am I not just getting my tickets in NFT form going to the game?"

And when I'm there and Mark Cuban knows I'm there, they can airdrop me a pass for me and my kids to be like, oh, you were at this game. And if you collect 10 of these, then you're going to be in the super fan club and be entered into a raffle to win the playoff tickets. And so I think NFTs will become far more ubiquitous as it becomes in real life. And so from an investing standpoint, I'm interested in all three of those areas. I'm interested in the long-term buy and hold assets that if you ever get your hands on you want to put away. And say, this is my Mona Lisa or my prized possession. I'm interested in the ability to trade and move around the markets where you can make money. And if I'm bullish on Eth, which I am. And this is a good way to get more Eth, then I would do it. I think you can speculate. And that's okay, as long as you do it with money you're willing to lose. And you're not tying up funds that you're saying, "I need these." I think that's okay. And by doing those three things, I think your best position to see what's coming and know who actually is going to unlock a lot of this value and create the things that are going to make NFTs so ubiquitous in our future.

[00:46:08] Patrick: Given how much time you've spent on this, and your comment earlier that 95 or something like that percent of these projects are on Ethereum. How do you think about the infrastructure in this space? Solana is the obvious one that people tend to ask about. Ethereum has its benefits, it also has its drawbacks. Do you think that most of this activity, this NFT asset class that's emerging, or whatever you want to call it, will be primarily on Ethereum? Yes, no? If not, why not?

[00:46:35] Eric: I mean, I'm grateful for how much you've taught me about Solana, and I'm not a Maxy by any means. Of all of the blue chip long-term assets that I would hold and put away for 10 to 20 years, they're all in Ethereum. End of sentence. Period. Glyphs, Punks, Ringers, XCOPY. These aren't on Solana, they're on one chain and they matter a lot. That's not going to change. I have begun to play with Solana NFTs. The idea of it is that they're lower cost, so you can do lower cost projects. And I think that's really interesting. Where my first experience with that was on Matic Polygon with Zed Run, and that needed to be. 38,000 horses, the horses are running 10 to 20 races per day, or whatever we're at now with fatigue. So you a lot of transactions. And if you did that on Ethereum, Zed could never run.

And so they're using an L2 chain for that, and that's working decently well. Anyone who's been in crypto and has ever used a bridge to cross trains knows how heart palpitating that moment is of, where did my money just go? I think we will see NFTs on other chains. I think that for utility and access and things we want to move around quickly that are lower cost, there's definitely a place for other chains to use NFTs. If you look at NBA Top Shot and what Rohan has built, Flow is a private blockchain. And what that allows is to do some really cool things that there is no transaction costs. You can use credit cards, you can go back to uses your dapper balance. But you're in currently a closed wall environment, which I believe will be opened up over time. So I totally see another place for other blockchains and the adoption of NFTs.

I think it matters... If I was working with a content creator like you. And you were saying, "Okay, where should we place our NFTs?" The question would be, well, what are you creating? Are you creating the once in a lifetime full Patrick experience and it's going to go for six to seven figures? Then we're going to want to go to Ethereum for that. If we're doing a conference token that we're going to use once, and it's going to go away, I'm much less inclined to use that Ethereum. Because I don't want the guests to show up, and when they show up we're having a gas surge because there's some trading going on and they can't get into the show. So we would want to use Solana or Matic for speed. I think it depends on what NFT you're creating and what your use cases are.

[00:48:47] Patrick: Is there anything about the Bored Ape Yacht Club specifically that you think is most innovative or exciting as a project that we haven't covered?

[00:48:57] Eric: I would just say that the fact that it was pushed by the community so hard. It was my first experience of actually feeling the consumers feeling like owners. I don't know if that's really sunk into people of the bypassing of the venture capital folks to fund ideas, and this connection of creator with owner. And so I think that what Bored Apes showed me, but really expands my view of the whole universe, is that the ability for content creators or businesses to connect directly with their end consumer and remove a lot of middle men is just mind blowing when you think about the possibilities.

The idea that Taylor swift could connect with her fans without Ticketmaster, Live Nation, StubHub, Google search, all of the things in the middle that are taking money away from Taylor and out of her consumer's pockets. And they're not going to go away forever. But the fact that we could make connection a lot closer is wild to me. And then the second thing I learned from Bored Apes is that it really starts to make you think about, what are all the assets? We love markets, we love price discovery as finance people. What are all of the markets that currently don't trade? Not because they shouldn't, but just because they're too small or they haven't been unlocked yet. And the fact that we actually could create new assets and have all of these new markets is just the most exciting thing I've ever seen.

[00:50:22] Patrick: Well, I think that's a great place to end it. I think the possibility remains much larger than the present reality. Is the nice way of saying it, I think. And maybe the healthy, skeptical way of viewing this ecosystem as burgeoning possibility. And certainly for me, I try not to have opinions too much on anything I do publicly, just because it's much more fun to listen to other people's views. But I do think that is the most interesting thing here, what you closed with. Which is the possibilities for community and interaction, and new business models that get unlocked by this technology. And I can't wait to watch it with you as a friend, and continue to learn from projects like Bored Ape. I think many people will be a part of creating one of these things in the future. And so it's a great introductory lesson to, I think, probably the most interesting of these projects today. Eric, thank you so much for breaking down Bored Apes with us.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
