
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released April 14th, 2021
Founder's Field Guide
Trevor McFedries - Building Web 3.0
Trevor McFedries is the founder of technology startup Brud and the creator of virtual pop star Miquela, a Gen Z icon with millions of fans worldwide. We cover the music-industrial complex, the creation of Miquela, and what Web 3.0 will mean for creators and builders.

00:00:00
01:05:18
Introduction
Patrick: [00:02:24] Our guest today is Trevor McFedries, the founder of technology startup Brud, and the creator of the virtual pop star Miquela, a gen Z icon with millions of fans worldwide. Trevor's background is fascinating. He worked as a DJ and producer, toured with Katy Perry, worked at Spotify and much more. In our conversation, we discuss the music industrial complex, the creation of Miquela, and what Web 3.0 will mean for creators and builders in the future. I hope you enjoy this conversation with Trevor McFedries.

The Beginnings
Okay, Trevor. So I think you probably have the most interesting sequence of things you've done of anybody I've had on this show, from college football player, to rap artist, to DJ, to software developer, to the Sequoia back founder, to tokenize community manager. You seem to have done everything interesting over the last 10 years. So my first question is, what unites all this stuff? It's all very different, yet it seems to be wildly creative and always interesting. How would you describe the thread that unites the disparate things that you've done?

Trevor: [00:03:25] I think if I had to answer that, it's probably just a deep curiosity mixed with some good, blue collar, Midwest work ethic. I've always just been really curious about things and was kind of ingrained very early on that if you work really hard at something, you could be good at it, whether that's football or that's crypto.

Patrick: [00:03:39] I want to talk about transitions a lot, because some of these things are pretty big jumps from one area to another. So maybe talk me through the very beginning. You're an athlete in college. Why did you stop doing that? What did you do first and next? And what lessons did you learn from that first professional chapter?

Trevor: [00:03:55] I actually was born in LA. My mom and dad split up when I was one and I moved back to Davenport, Iowa, where I grew up until I was 16. And in Iowa, I was building flash video games and packing together websites for mom and pops around the neighborhood. And I was also playing in hardcore bands and really interested in music. But those things were hobbies. It wasn't clear that could be real life. In my head it felt like I could be a University of Iowa football player and maybe one day be head football coach, or perhaps a firefighter or something. It was a pretty narrow scope of where I thought I could see myself down the road. And when I was 16, my mom, more or less forced me to move to Los Angeles. But in her thinking, I think it really was about having me see what potential outcomes I could have for myself. And when I moved to LA, all of those things happen. I actually ended up going to Beverly Hills High School. And one of my first friends there, his father had started a very big fashion line, and he had 30 Ferraris lined in front of his house in Beverly Hills. And I remember asking him in this moment, "which one's your favorite one to drive? Which one do you like the most?" And he was like, "drive them? I don't drive them, I collect them." And I was just like, oh my. It just blew my entire brain apart. And so most of my first few years in LA were just that, recognizing that there are these people who are doing creative, interesting things as a profession, and that was something that I could potentially do as well. And so, when I decided I wanted to go to university, I was kind of toying through football scholarship offers.

And then my actual dream, which was to go to RISD. I wanted to go to design school or I wanted to be in Silicon Valley. And my mom more or less said those ones are free. If you don't like it, you can quit and come back and do whatever you want. And so I took a football scholarship and thought I'd have all this time around the football to do stuff and make stuff. It turns out 5:00 AM till 10:00 PM, you're doing football or school stuff. And I ended up quitting, coming back to LA with this dream of starting a clothing line and having a web dev shop on the side, and I ended up becoming music as well. But that was kind of the initial jump. It was like, I wanted to do this thing because LA blew my brain apart. And then when I went to school, I didn't have time to do those things. And so my mother, who's eminently supportive, let me come back, stay in her house and try to figure out what I actually want to do with my life.

Internet and the Music Industry
Patrick: [00:05:50] One of the things from the outside, looking in that's a thread that seems to unite a lot of this is the technology behind creativity or creators, and it starts with music. So you had a chunk of very successful run as a DJ touring with lots of very well-known musicians as a music producer as well. What do you take from that stint of your life? I'm sure you're still interested in it. But when you were doing that most actively, what was it like acquiring those skills? What stands out about that skillset that is more broadly applicable in some of the chapters we'll talk about next?

Trevor: [00:06:25] You speaking of that even reminds me that probably one of the great threads to all of these things are just simply computers, and more importantly, the internet, it was this great playing field leveler. It sounds probably trite to people who are younger, but the ability to pirate software and be a graphic designer, or pirate software and be a record producer as a kid who was broke in the Midwest was world changing and just unbelievable for someone like me. And so with music, the opportunity to sample records, make things, reimagine the songs and the way that house music producers were doing, that was very exciting to me and something that I started doing pretty early on.

Some of the things that I think I learned in creating music and being a creator first is that I've always found that there are people who are making things for their peers and there are people that are making things for their audience or their customers. It's kind of like a Paul Graham-ism.

But I always told DJs, don't DJ for DJs. Don't write for writers. Write for readers. These are for people on the dance floor. And I think that's always informed what I've done, and maybe that's the Midwest sensibility as well. But when I was a DJ, I acted like I was the janitor. These people worked all week to come out and have a good time.

I'm not going to hang them over the head with minimal techno because I love it. If they want to hear a Pit Bull song, I'll play them a Pit Bull song. And I think a lot of other peers didn't really take that approach. It was far more about their artistic expression than it was about this collective experience.

Patrick: [00:07:40] Can you describe how the music world worked when you were most steeped in it? So say when you're touring with Katy Perry or somebody like this, how did the business work and how did the performances work? What's interesting from the inside that wouldn't be obvious from the outside?

Trevor: [00:07:54] I feel really lucky, I think to have seen the last gasping breath of the giant music industry, industrial complex. I was signed in 2007 to Interscope. Jimmy Iovine, obviously this titan industry effectively had a playbook for us. And we were an act that was a priority record label, and those of you that aren't aware of the industry, they're usually kind of the favorites where the label said, hey, these are our priorities. Everyone in this company, we're going to break these artists. We're going to make this happen. And we got the royal treatment. I was a part of a group called Shwayze. We had MTV reality show. We played TRL. We would go and do signings at record stores and our CD would be way up in front. We were able to get a commercial, a Pontiac commercial, where our song is featured in it.I mean, they're pushing all the buttons that should have just made this record skyrocket. The sad reality is that the internet was changing the dynamic of how these records were broken. And the compelling, cool thing for me was that I understood how those things work, and so I started getting pulled into those rooms with some of those executives, and I was able to explain how they might be able use some of these tools to kind of better break our record.

Patrick: [00:08:57] What about some of the artists that you worked with did you find most interesting? So you got to see this bridge from, let's call it the industrial complex sort of top-down, king making and pulling the strings, to all of a sudden the internet is taking over who gets popular and why. And some of these artists that you've worked with have been around in both of those worlds. Describe that transition scene through the partners that you had, the people that you worked with?

Trevor: [00:09:23] One of the more obvious anecdotes is Katy Perry. Katy and I were very close friends. Katy is someone who navigated the music industry for a long time as a young recording artist, to being signed and dropped multiple times before she had her breakout success. And we were so young and kind of naive, that I remember when she got signed, she was able to buy a new Prius. And I remember being like, oh my God, this is it. You won the game. This is crazy. You got a new car. That's amazing. And then at some point we went on a Warped Tour in 2008 together, and we had our record and Shwayze, and I was actually playing solo as a DJ as well a bunch on that tour. And Kissed a Girl came out. And I actually remember being in a studio in New York City with Katy and the producers, and they were playing Hot and Cold, another single, and Kissed a Girl, and asking what should be the first single. And I was like, definitely not Kissed a Girl. Definitely Hot and Cold. That is a banger. I don't know so much, just couldn't have been more wrong, the most classic take. But at some point on that Warped Tour, it went from Katy playing for 100 people to the entire festival lined up around the small stage. Her stage diving and going for it. And she's someone who was just so well versed in her craft and so talented that it was undeniable. It was just this rocket ship. You're so young, you don't really understand how this is supposed to work. But since then, I've obviously seen people come and fail, and fail miserably. But for Katy, it seemingly felt like she had all the tools, all the charisma, no one was going to out work her, and to be able to be a part of that journey and to watch her go from literally her sleeping on my couch, us hanging out as friends, to going to the Super Bowl with her to watch her play the halftime show has been one of the great pleasures of my life.

Patrick: [00:10:57] If we zoom forward and stick with music to the present day, what is the most interesting thing to you about the music landscape and industry in 2021?

Trevor: [00:11:07] Oh my goodness. For me, the stuff that I'm really interested in is, I think there's going to be enough pressure applied by Web 3 and some of the financial opportunities around music that this legacy architecture might actually have to change. We still talk about mechanicals, literally language to describe a mechanical turn of a physical device. It feels like antiquities. And I think we're going to actually see some real change in how the architecture of this machine works. And as a result, I think we can build better futures for creative people, which is really, really exciting to me.

Patrick: [00:11:40] We'll come back to Web 3.0 a little bit later on, but would love to rewind time back to your next major chapter. We could talk maybe briefly about Spotify, what you learned there. But then also the foundations of Brud, and the early building that were doing, and I'll call it the spark of inspiration that led to that idea. So maybe with a quick sidebar on Spotify, what drew you there and what did you learn? And then what was the inspiration that created Brud?

Trevor: [00:12:04] So when I was in Shwayze, I've never drank or smoked in my life. I was a DJ and artist for a very long time. I didn't really party. I was always been a bit nerdy. And so, I was playing a South by Southwest event, I believe in 2008, I think it was the Perez Hilton showcase to really kind of date it. A celebrity gossip blogger event at South by Southwest. And there was another band playing called Chester French. And while we were playing that showcase in pure South by fashion, it was running, I think four or five hours behind. So I think we were supposed to play at 10:00 and it ended up being like 2:00 in the morning. And as a result, all these artists were sitting backstage, and a lot people were drinking, and hanging out and doing their thing. And I'm sitting in the corner reading a book, and there's a curly, red haired kid sitting in another corner reading a book. And I'm like, oh, maybe we should be friends.And so, I met D.A., D.A. Wallach, And we started talking. And throughout our journeys in the music business, I think we both felt a little frustrated. I've been building some software tools for friends. He was interested in technology and software as well. And he had joined Spotify a few years later. And I think they were thinking about trying to bring someone that could interface with artists, potentially kind of connect dots between a bunch of solution engineers and a Hollywood music industry. And I had just come off a tour actually in 2011 opening for Katy Perry, a world tour where I was on the road for a year straight, and the idea of having some stability, being able to go to a gym, have a girlfriend, that sounded pretty sweet. And so, was pretty compelled by what Spotify had to offer. And D.A, I went over his place, we talked about it a bunch. I flew to New York. I met Ken Parks and ended up deciding to do that thing.

And it was really an incredible ride. It was a pretty special time and opportunity, I think, to been posted on my thinking and create an artist voice internally at Spotify. And that was really special. And beyond that, inter clicking dots to Brud, while I was there, I kind of, for the first time, got to see this lean startup model play out. I only kind of known more of a waterfall method of spending five years to go make a record. I'm like, push it off a cliff. Whereas at Spotify, it was make it, ship it, talk to the customers, learn what they like and they didn't like, and iterate quite rapidly. And that seems so commonplace now, but it really felt radical to me. I thought it was super important.

While I was at Spotify, Dan and others had said like, look, we really want you to continue producing records and being involved in the artist community, A, because we want you to be on the ground so you can give us feedback on how we can help artists more, but also it lends credibility to you in this space as an artist who's actually doing it. And so, while I was there I started producing and managing an artist named Banks, this girl I had met from the Valley who was immensely talented. And we had been talking a lot about how we can launch this project, and I really wanted to treat it like a software product. And so I built some data scrapers for Last.fm and YouTube, really kind of basic stuff, so when we put songs out, we can better understand who the audience was and what they were responding to. And what was kind of cool at the time, she was this nice, 26 year old, Jewish girl from the Valley. And everyone was like, oh, this should be Adele. this should be Florence the Machine. And all the fans of it were fans of Trey Songz, The Weekend, Drake. It was young black kids. And so for me, it allowed us to say, okay, well, you know what? We could probably go to urban outlets and then come back to pitchfork, because I'm not sure you can go to pitchfork and go straight to urban outlets. And so that kind of data informed decision making, as obvious as that is to every other business in the world, wasn't totally a commonplace in the music industry. And so being able to leverage data to understand where the artists were, to be able to, I think most importantly, pair both a quantitative analysis with some qualitative. I remember looking at some data before we were on the road and seeing there were all of these urban music fans who like Trey Songz, The Weekend, and then a bunch of Tegan and Sara fans. And we were like, what could possibly could have ... And we're like, oh, these songs are love songs, breakup song. The lyrics here actually kind of connect these two bodies of people. And so can we hammer other fans of love song artists with lyrics on Facebook and try to bring them down the funnel? That converted pretty well.

And so, I think all of that stuff really informed what would become Brud, which is this idea of trying to create characters and narratives that could touch people and impact their lives, and leveraging technology, and especially data that tells you that in a more informed way.

Digital Celebrities and Inclusion
Patrick: [00:16:02] So Brud is the company behind certainly the most famous, what I'll call purely digital celebrity, little Miquela. I would love to hear in as much detail as you're able and willing to share, the process of learning to make that happen. I don't know if there's a whiteboard at the start, or whatever the blank canvas was that you began with, what were the first steps there? Another way of asking the question is, if you were to launch a new artist or something today, what would you do? What would be the sequence that you would go through that you've learned based on your experience there?

Trevor: [00:16:30] Whenever I talk to new artists, one of the first things that have them do, is I try to have them think about the things they're really passionate about that they're most embarrassed to tell their core peer group about. You're super into death metal and all your fans are death metal fans and buddies, but you also love the ballet. And there actually probably is an opportunity to find other people that are deeply passionate about death metal and the ballet. And because there isn't any representation for them in the world, you can have these really passionate people who can kind of be your super fan. And thinking about creating a new character in Miquela, I asked her to think about where there's cultural, white space...We can call it Tony Hawk white space internally. Where are these emergent subcultures that kind of need a rock star personality to kind of break them through into the mainstream? I'll often referenced Scrillex and EDM and dance music. You kind of remember pre Skrillex or even Steve Aoki. The idea of a rock star DJ was a student visa with a mesh t-shirt blowing in the breeze behind him, six pack abs. And it was very Saint-Tropez. And all of a sudden you had this personality and the Skrillex who was the front man for an email rock band who would be deejaying with some decks and jump on top of those decks and stage dive into the crowd. That type of rockstar personality had never really existed behind the DJ booth.

And I think when you brought those two things together, it gave this thing that kind of have cheesy and Saint-Tropez pastiche. It gave it this rock star sensibility. And we were like, "Man, this is so punk and cool. I want to be a part of that and it's electric." And so I'm thinking about creating a new character like Lil Miquela. It was like, "Man, I think there's an opportunity." And this again seems quite trite now, but there was an opportunity to create a character that everyone could see themselves in. It almost looked like a future human. People look at Lil Miquela and they see someone who's Dominican or Thai, or whatever they want to see. And beyond that, early on people said like, "Well, why isn't she shaped like a beer model or something? You could have built anything, why does she have a gap in her teeth? Why are her eyebrows like that?"

And the idea was to better understand and identify what some non-traditional beauty standards could be that we could champion through this icon and how we could use her otherness and non traditional point of views and features to explore stories of otherness. And I think that was kind of the core theme in Lil Miquela's life. And it's something that's obviously been really resonates with me as the kid who grew up like a weirdo black kid in a mostly white Midwest. It was, where does it mean to be othered? And how can we kind of use these analogies and these parables to make people understand that it's okay to be different. And beyond that, that being different can be this super power that you can use to create a better reality for yourself and for the people you care about.

Patrick: [00:19:02] What does it feel like to be othered?

Trevor: [00:19:04] I mean, I think it can be incredibly terrifying as a young person. One of the things that I always think about, and this is even like a technology analogy, is I remember when Snapchat was really starting to crank and it was pretty difficult for my peers who were college aged then to figure out why it was connecting so well. And I think the ability to post content without having the visible likes was really important because I remember being 12 and 13 and really wanting to feel the same. 10, 11, 12, I really wanted to feel like a part of this. I didn't want to feel like a freak. And then as I got older, 15, 16, I started wanting to become an individual. And I actually took a lot of pride in how different I was. But at those formative years, when you feel different and you don't feel like you belong, it can be extremely tough.

I remember when Kai the creator first emerged, I was a black kid who was into computers and straight edge hardcore. I wasn't into 50 Cent and Bubba Platinum. And as a result, I was too black for the white kids, too white for black kids. But thankfully there have been these figures that have emerged. They've said, "You know what? Here's a space you can operate in where there are people like you." And that's really important. That's what we wanted to do with Lil Miquela as well. Here's a space, a person operating who people don't believe in, or don't recognize as being real, who treat her identity is not being valid. And if you're a non-binary kid in Missouri who's been told over and over again that your identity isn't valid. Here's maybe someone you can see achieving great things that can inspire you and that it has played out.

Patrick: [00:20:24] Do you think that this elegant idea you have of embracing one's strange intersections, is what I'll call it. I'm picturing a Venn diagram where it's that Scrillex slice or whatever you want to call it, an unusual overlap. Do you think that same concept applies beyond artists just more broadly to business? Do you think that that holds true?

Trevor: [00:20:42] Absolutely. Yeah. Some of my favorite businesses have been established and have carved out a space for themselves that felt totally niche. Hey, this is a low tamp thing. There aren't many people like that. And if you can build that Tam, you can say, "Hey, we're out here. We exist. We're freaks." All of a sudden you have this phenomena. One of my favorite things about Star Wars it's like, "We're nerd, no one understands us." This is the biggest movie franchise of all time, but they've been able to tell their story of how they were outsiders. They were at the beginning. It's the Mac versus PC thing. I think it actually is a really great opportunity to create this really passionate subset of people that are going to go to bat to you because they feel ostracized, whether or not it's valid.

Patrick: [00:21:18] If we go back now to the start of Lil Miquela. So talk me through the sequencing. What happened first? What did you design first? And I'm very interested in what the team looks like behind a character like this. So you're no longer tied to the humanity of one person. You have more creative license, but it's still people behind this whole thing. Talk me through the sequencing. What happened first and what were you learning in the early days?

Trevor: [00:21:41] So to back it up a little bit, a lot of this was informed by my experience of being a creative person, being an artist, and also my experience in being othered. I always thought there was, as a young person, what if someone can literally stand in your shoes and see what it feels like to be met with a racist epithet or whatever it is? Or what if you could understand what it was like to be catcalled walking down the street? And fast forward a few years later, being on the internet, I would put a song into the world, on SoundCloud or YouTube or whatever it is. And you'd read a comment. So I'm being like, "Ooh, I hate that snare sound." You kind of feel sick viscerally. And it became clear to me that this thing I made almost was an extension of myself. When people talk poorly about it, I felt some of the similar pains I would feel people would talk about me personally about how I looked or whatever it was.

And in thinking about that, then being met with some information around television programs, Will and Grace, or the Jeffersons, there's all this great data around Will and Grace being responsible for gay marriage in the U.S.

It became clear that those two things might be able to intersect. That narratives inform our reality and I think that narratives are probably one of the most powerful tools we have in our lives. And that if media and powerful narratives are met with technology that enabled them to scale and touch people, you actually do a lot of good or a lot of bad. And I think the opportunity to do a lot of good was really compelling.

And what I was seeing in my own experience, kind of while all of this was converging, was that I'd always lived in these, I guess, hackers spaces, IRC, whatever it was. And they traditionally had this technical optimist point of view on the world that we're going to build technology to solve people and help people. And the bet started to take more of a regressive turn. And I thought that people were starting to be more frustrated with their reality and were starting to look for people to scapegoat. And that was frustrating, worrying to me. And so it was clear that new types of media evolving that were accelerating those things, social media, where a lot of the same ideas applied. That you can create narratives that could travel through these new medias and shape your reality. And so all of those things combined to say, "Okay, wouldn't it be amazing if you can do and create Will and Grace style phenomena from a global scale?" If we have more issues than ever that are global, whether it's climate change or it's economic or it's a pandemic, if we collectively agree on and understand what's happening, then perhaps we can kind of move towards solutions and build a better reality for all of us. And if we're going to do that, we're going to need to think about how to create talent that can scale and interact people globally. Because as much as I love Jennifer Lawrence, she can't speak Mandarin that I know of. And she's kind of fixed in one location at a time. But if you can create a character that can speak Mandarin, Portuguese, English, Spanish, that could be in Shanghai, New York and Rio at the same time, wow. That would be really important for building a better, more tolerant future. And that was the dream. And so at that point, I was thinking what would that character look like? In my head, I was always aware of what would be the Halloween costume? What would be the silhouette? If people would remember this silhouette was Halloween costume that would make this person, a character, but almost like a caricature.

And I also was hyper aware of the kind of success that I thought Lady Gaga had. That was really important. I had kind of known legacy celebrity to be something where you saw this person and you trembled, or you'd faint. People see Michael Jackson and they would just faint. And then there was this kind of emergent YouTuber celebrity, where they would see them and they would run up and hug them because that was their friend. They engaged with them day to day. They're so in tap, in tune with their lives. And I wanted to be able to split the difference. And kind of the way I had seen Gaga do it, where she was wearing high fashion meat dresses to award shows and catering to a coastal elite as this romantic attachment, kind of a legacy celebrity, but also speaking to her little monsters in a way that felt way more Logan Paul or something. That really pulled them in very close.

And so that was the basic stuff in thinking about how we wanted to create Miquela and the characters so that we can engage people in these ways that we thought would connect Web 2.0, but also legacy properties like a Vogue. I think we did that pretty well. And then you start thinking about, literally, the aesthetics. What would a future human look like? Is there a certain skin tone or facial shape? Or are there emergent aesthetic trends that we could ride, speak to people? Whether people want to aspire towards and just come on this journey as well. And that was all pulling in the other references, literally modeling the character myself, playing with hairstyles, landing on the space buns, which have kind of become iconic. The freckles. If you think about Halloween costumes, because some iconic outfits, but for the most part, people are wearing the space buns and the freckles, and that's becoming a big part of who Miquela is as a character.

Building Narratives
Patrick: [00:25:49] What have you learned about what makes for a great narrative? What are the ingredients that need to there for a great narrative?

Trevor: [00:25:56] Oh my goodness. Another great question. I'm an engineer, and so often I come back to the frameworks. Obviously, a hero's journey and some of that stuff, applied itself very well. The novel thing for us, and I think we've had to deal with, is that there weren't established behaviors for entertaining a narrative on social media. And for those of you who aren't familiar with Lil Miquela in her story, the story primarily unfolds across social and what I would describe as a transmedia way. And so I think of the best storytellers of our time as being the Kardashians, Jenner, Wests. These people who are able to connect dots across social media for their super fans, middle layer, while press TMZ style coverage, and then this layer of television or traditional long-form linear narrative stuff to connect the dots across all the best of those bits. But what we were trying to do is start at the bottom of that inverted pyramid and just do the social bits. And so there isn't an established behavior of renting this VHS in the movie store and rewinding the tape the beginning.Or starting at the first season of the Sopranos box set. People jumped into this fray wherever they are on social. And if they're passionate, maybe they'll scroll back and figure out how the other characters fit into the fray, but there needed to be different connective tissue. All that is to say, one of our early champions was JJ Abrams. And I think some of the things that he instilled in me telling a story was A, not to write too far out. I always wanted to write six months in advance. And he'd be like, "Look. In television, you can think about what's going to be the main star." And all of a sudden they pull out of favor and this guest star people fall in love with. So you want to have wiggle room to really take on information and iterate, which to me felt very much like software. You were like, "Yeah, let's have a thesis, let's go put it out in the world. Let's see how it responds. Let's iterate accordingly." That's what we've tried to do really abroad is really listened to our fans and make them part of the process as much as possible.

Patrick: [00:27:41] I love that. And this idea of pick it up anywhere along the line obviously is a whole different skillset. The hero's journey is great, but it's very much a defined arc that if you're in the belly of the beast, the call to action's not going to make... You're not going to know what the hell's going on. You have to follow it linearly. It's a fascinating, fascinating difference.

Trevor: [00:28:00] Yeah. And I actually think if people at home are interested exploring this, that the hero's journey to me applies really well in film. Dan Harmon of, I think, Rick and Morty fame, has this story circle model. I think that's what it's called. I actually found that more informative and helpful for us because television kind of "has legs". And so you kind of have this space, the office community, parks and rec, stuff happens there. And they can't leave the space and they come back to it. And that's often what we're doing in our narratives. How our home-based, core cast of characters in there. And then there are these situations, these challenges to overcome, and they're brought back to the stable center. Rinse, repeat.

Social Networks, Crypto, and Platforms
Patrick: [00:28:35] Can you give me your impression of the state of social networks today? And at a high level, what's interesting that's happening. It seems like there's this new explosion of the three or four places that everyone knows. Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, et cetera, Snap. And now there seems to be a lot more experimentation, especially in COVID. What platforms matter and are most interesting you today?

Trevor: [00:28:53] I could do that to so many lenses. I think in viewed through the traditional social media lens, for people that are on, probably listening to this podcast, they probably use those platforms to brand build and to try to create neutral businesses or potentially revenue around that kind of brand. I think if you're thinking about it that way, it's clear to me that Clubhouse is probably a great vector for that. You can get on there and you can build audiences, you can share insights. You could probably do quite well. TikTok is a little more challenging because most people live in the For You page, less than the Following page. So you're kind of only as good as your last hit and you got be pretty special. And then I think there's emergent trends around Gen Z, to me, that are enabling a different type of social.

Even this dark social stuff. Discord is interesting to me immensely because I think people there are able to operate online with a little bit of anonymity. I often think the way that millennials and olders view social and the internet, it's pretty different than the way Gen Z interfaces with it. In my experience, it's pretty stark division. There's a generation of young people who have been met with this idea that their teachers might not even exist. The climate change is such real threat that A, they might not get to their 50s or 60s. So why brand build or do the things that legacy generations have tried to do to accrue wealth or to kind of accrue a brand that would lead to wealth? Beyond that, it feels like the cards are so stacked against them that the path to upward mobility is as challenging. Probably is more fruitful to think about being as present here and now and trying to live their lives as best they can in this moment. The double whammy of climate change and upper mobility and being nonexistent means why try to even play the game?Probably millennials swam as fast as they could. They keep up. They're on a treadmill and are just kind of barely getting by. And Gen Z are like, "You know what? I'm opting out." And then the second path in gen Z that I see, which to me is really interesting because I see a lot of TikTok stars in LA. When I was their age, 21, 22, whatever it was, it almost felt like you needed to have a talent in order to be respected and to be celebrated by your peers. You were a rapper, or if you were famous for doing nothing, you became a DJ or a photographer or whatever it was. Some kind of thing that was pretty easy to execute, but it can give someone a title. What's interesting about these TikTok kids is they just want to get rich.

You know what I mean? And they'll drop the pretense of needing to have some romantic skillset. You talk to them and you're like, "What do you do?" It's like, "What do you mean? I'm an influencer." "Oh, do you want to be an actor? Do you want to make movies?" Like, "No. I want to get rich on this tech investing." "Wait, what?" "Yeah." Like, "I'm just going to pay the capital that I make for some ad, deploy it because I can get into hot deals and get rich." "Oh cool. So you don't want to make something or do..." "No. The point of the game is to get rich as fast as possible so I can have a chill life and do whatever I want." And you're like, "Oh, cool." And so they've kind of decoupled themselves from a lot of the dominant narratives that I had beat into my head when I was a young person. Your self worth is determined by the value you create. And the American dream, you can live it and you can do this. Kind of like, "No, let's live now. Make dough as fast as possible so I can take my friends to Saddle Ranch or whatever." And again, like they're not caught up in even the legacy frameworks of what is romantic and appropriate. Saddle Ranch to me in LA is not cheesy. If you had taste and you were a rich kid in the past, you're going to the Saddle Ranch. You went across the street to Sunset Tower. That place sucks. It's stiff. I want to go hang out with my friends at this place that feels like a Cabo San Lucas bar. And that, to me, I think is really disconcerting for millennials especially, who are so attached, to my opinion, some of these Western European ideas about what beauty and class and all of these things are and what you should aspire towards, which is what these kids are aspiring towards.

Patrick: [00:32:21] So as I think about broad and what you're creating, a Lil Miquela, et cetera, the extensions around that are adjacent to that, it seems sort of like the opposite. You are creating something fairly indelible with cohesiveness, coherence, a common narrative, et cetera. How do you think about the vision from here forward for that world that you've begun to create? And also, how do you think about it as a business? Obviously when you create an ecosystem in a world, there are lots of ways to monetize around it. And media seems to be changing a lot in terms of how that monetization can happen. But how do you think about those two things operating together, continuing to expand this world that you're creating, but also building a business along side of it?

Trevor: [00:32:59] I would say that Web v1 business model is very similar to traditional media businesses operating, or media personalities operating Web 2.0 era. That is you create the media. You hope that builds a fan base. You then try and figure out a way to sell something to that fan base. Rinse and repeat. And the media you're creating isn't the thing that you're selling to the Sam's. I think what's really exciting about the Web 3.0 Model, non-fungible tokens just to get into it, is that you can create media and you can sell that media to somebody who's deeply passionate about collecting that moment or whatever it is.

And what's awesome is you also participate in the resale of that media forever. That's great. You're still able to kind of build businesses around those things, but it's a direct path to that revenue it's really exciting. With our characters in our company, what we've always wanted to do is be fan first. To try to create media that we thought touched them and left a really big impact on their lives. One of the things that I'm also excited about in parallel to the shift from Web 2.0 to Web 3.0 is this evolution people have called the creator economy. That to me, I think actually, it's super important interstitial between legacy models for creative people, and more resilient future models. What I see in the creator and passion economy are creators who are pretty burnt out. They're kind of individuals will be of a Substack or a Patreon or an OnlyFans or a Twitch channel. You're effectively on this treadmill where you're trying to crank out as much quality as you can to bring people into this world of yours and then monetize as best you can. I think I saw NinjaStop streaming for 48 hours and lost like 10% of his subs. That's pretty brutal.


 

Source: Menabytes

And so what you're seeing is creators who are trying to figure out how to build more resilient business models so they don't just fall apart. And that to me, actually lends itself well to a more collectivist approach. That's kind of funny thing about bundling and un-bundling metaphor that you're seeing people on Substack being like, man, this Substack thing is quite hard. There were 59 of us and there was one that was a fixed amount of demand. Now all these new people are entering the fray and it's like you mentioned returns. What if all of us writing alone came together and brought something together and you're like, wouldn't that be called a magazine? Isn't that? Anyways. Sure. No. Again, imagining these could be magazines, but there are actually ways with web three and emergent crypto models to build your own economies and to capture more value. One of those that I speak to a lot is that you could imagine Glenn Greenwald, for instance, playing the kind of traditional value prop of web two, where it's like, man, Glenn is awesome. He writes great things. I'm going to pay $5 to have access to those things.

And that becomes a reason for you to want to tell your friends, Hey, this is really great. You should be a part of this. I want to be able to talk about it with you at dinner, kind of the traditional network effect. But what's cool about web three is you could imagine someone like Glenn hypothetically saying, Hey, I actually am going to create the Glenn token. If you hold this Glenn token, one of 10,000 that I minted, you have access to the media that I create, in which case you're going to be, not only encouraging your friends to access Glenn's media because it's important, and it's relevant, but also because you see a financial upside. As there's more demand on a fixed amount of tokens, the value of that token goes up. And so all of a sudden, you not only have the only have kind of traditional effects of web two, you have these financial incentives that your listeners are probably very familiar with, which is why you've had Bitcoin and Ripple fanboys screaming at you to buy crypto for the last 10 years. Because when you buy their bags, they get a better return. So I think that's going to unlock a lot of really novel stuff in media. And it's going to really empower a lot of creative people. You obviously seen NFTs selling for millions of dollars. That to me is a reflection of the first part of this pyramid, where a lot of the volumes being captured by platforms. I also see the hyper-financialization of some of these assets. You're going to see entirely another windfall of capital flow indicators here.

How Crypto is Changing the World
Patrick: [00:36:32] Do you think there's any other important or meaningful differences from the standpoint of the creator or art generally speaking between web 2.0 and 3.0 that aren't mostly captured by this idea of crypto or NFTs?

Trevor: [00:36:45] So, we've moved through a few different phases. DeFi in the summer last year I think it was really important in establishing some of these primitives. And I think educating people like myself, who don't have the best economic chops as to the power of some of the instruments for creating value and then this non-fungible token moment in the provenance piece, is actually, I think, and I think Fred Ehrsam tweeted the other day, it turns out when people are interested in art, they are in finance more or less. And I think that that's totally true. If you would have asked me if people today are earning 30% of their money or buying a JPEG for a hundred thousand dollars, I'd be like definitely earning 30%, but it turns out people are really interested in art. And so in this moment, you've now seen people who have come to terms with the idea of provenance and this idea that you can basically solve for these two things that I think a lot of people in media lived at odds. It's the idea that people could both individually own an asset, but that asset, that piece of media could also be universally accessible. And with that thing coming to pass, I think now this next phase is going to probably be reflected in DAOs, or decentralized autonomous organizations, where people recognize, holy cow, these financial instruments can unlock a lot of value for myself as an individual. And man, now this media thing means I can apply some of this value to purchasing art, I think, better establishing my identity and this emergent meta-verse because your wallet effectively is your identity. It's no different than having a Picasso in your home and is like having a Beeple in your e-wallet address. And then as we move to this DAO model, we will go, holy crap. If we all come together to collectively solve for things in this organization, we can apply our capital, our cultural acumen, all of these things, and make really meaningful change in the world. And I think that to me is this next phase, this DAO phase.

Patrick: [00:38:26] It sounds like classic technology stuff that when something like this happens, it unlocks a lot of new supply to just like Uber and Airbnb or Door Dash or whoever created this whole new category of people. Dashers, I think there's a million dashers or something. The idea of NFTs may create a lot more artists. Do you think that that's true? Are you seeing early signs of that? And what has you most excited in that scene, generally speaking, where you've been very early?

Trevor: [00:38:53] I will say generally I'm not a huge fan a lot of the artwork that's emerged right now. I see if you find that the protocols to be almost more interesting artwork than the artwork itself, but another person tweeted with the New York Times PDF from their website version of the internet equivalent NFTs where people are effectively porting an old format. It's like reading a book on the radio. Here's a JPEG that you can purchase. I actually think as you get into more programmable art and into artwork that can be dynamic and respond to different outside variables, you can imagine API is plugging into some of this stuff. You can imagine different real world outcomes. You're going to start to see an entirely new type of crypto media that's going to be far more compelling. I also think as we start to see legacy infrastructure start to come on chain, the ability to sell rights, the ability to sell future access to things and include those things in these tokens is going to be really compelling. And so that, to me, I think it's the next chapter that I'm really excited for.


 

Source: Menabytes

Patrick: [00:39:49] So now you've really got my interest. I've never thought about this. So just make it hypothetical. We won't even tie it to a Lil Miquela or Brud or anything. To say more about this programmable media experience or programmable art. How might you approach something like that as a creator?

Trevor: [00:40:01] I mean like really simple, obvious ways you could imagine right now Beeple sells a NFT that's a Superbowl NFT for next year's Super Bowl. And this NFT effectively has 30, whether they're 32, or something, different outcomes. And now you kind of have to speculate on a Beeple, but also what if Tom Brady wins another ring, man, it's actually really interesting. What are the odds of that? And me as a fan of X, Y, or Z, how does this play into this. That's a really simple way, but you can imagine work that's dynamic that can reflect the weather.

So you can imagine having a static artwork that has different weather behind it. And when you buy it, the IP address that purchases this thing on chain or whatever it is, is tied to the weather in that area. And this work is now dynamic and reflects the weather that's happening outside of your home. Simple cheeky stuff like that, it's actually quite boring to talk about it now. It's probably going to be really fun for artists to explore. And I think we'll kind of redefine what you think what's the visual artist, because you're going to be able to pull in people that are effectively programmers and people that are thinking about systems and in a more wholesome way.

Patrick: [00:41:01] Wow. I love that. And so as you think about your own pursuits and business and characters, what is the most cutting edge? Like what is the most out there thing that you've considered or thought about or seen somebody else do?

Trevor: [00:41:14] Oh my goodness. The thing that I'm really fixated on. And I think the thing that we talk a lot about at Brud is how we can build a new type of storytelling organization, one that includes the fan. It makes them a part of the community and a part of the organization. And what we're trying to do is think about how we can treat fans less like people that are just there to be sold to, or to be mined for ideas, but to make them a part of the creativity. And so if you think about us existing, primarily in broadcast media era where effectively our tours or the solo geniuses are coming up with visions or stories and then imposing them on you, even think about the director effectively saying, here's what matters in this world that I'm taking you through, my cropped point of view. We're going to move to a space where even in like virtual reality, where effectively people are creating scenes that are far more interactive and immersive, where you can take yourself to those journeys. Or if you think about how that's reflected to me and even popular media and popular culture in general is the celebrities, to me that resonate the most, aren't the ones that can get up and read the lines on the script. The ones that actually are really great interacting to all of the different inputs that are being imposed on the world in real time. So like Cardi B, she's someone who's so good on the spot, Lil Nas X, effectively a memer who became a celebrity who can react in real time in a way that feels really native to a generation. And so I think trying to build for more interactive futures is where we're at.

And I think the crypto is going to be a big part of that. And so our company Brud, Inc will be moving to like Brud DAO and we're going to help sponsor the creation of that DAO. And we're going to enable our fans to participate in the narrative creation by giving them tokens such that they can come together and vote on the directions of our characters and effectively move this thing that was a television show you watch on social media into a choose your own adventure game played out by fans all over the world. And that, to me, I think it was really incredible to be able to say this thing, Miquela has effectively like five or seven times the audience people viewing her stuff every day that a hit cable television show does. We collectively come together to bring this DAO to pass, and then collectively create these narratives. We now have a say in this thing, seven to 10 million people interact with daily.

Media and Technology
Patrick: [00:43:21] It's so fascinating. And it begs the question of where the line between technology and media lies. General question, but also a specific question I'm always most interested in media companies that necessarily have to build technology themselves to accomplish the outcome, the artistic outcome that they're after. What have you learned there? What technology have you had to build that wasn't available to you? You're an engineer. I think you're fascinated with both these spaces. How do you think about building new technology to enable consumer experiences that you want to enable?

Trevor: [00:43:50] You really nailed a really important part of what we do here as well. Often talking to investors, well, are you a media company? Are you a tech company? To me, the best media companies are actually technology companies disguised as media companies. To me, Disney is a technology company. The Imagineers are cranking out these incredible tools for telling stories, and those are being handed off visionary folks. But some of the things we've had to build, we wanted to build and tell stories that were being told at the pace of the internet. If you think about legacy tooling for creating, especially CG or like 3D media, these platforms, and these tools were primarily built for people that were, A, doing longer lead, really expensive production. So if a high end video game takes three to five years, feature film, Minions, whatever it takes, three to five years, hundreds of million dollars.

And what we wanted to do was to create media that could literally be as responsive as the other personalities that's on the web. So what we had to do was start thinking about how we could take some of these tools and almost create middleware and different pieces of software that allowed us to connect dots across those familiar pieces, but utilize them in ways such that we could create things, not for 4K resolution five years from now, but at the resolution of an Instagram post in three hours. And so that meant compromises on certain things like is the lighting in our scene perfect? Are the composites perfect? Not necessarily, but one of the things that we recognize as the most important thing you can do is tell a great story and that fans are going onto this journey. We'll let some of these weaknesses fall by the wayside, if that story is really compelling. So whatit really is tooling around production, tooling around communication. I think one of the really novel things we've always wanted to do is the centralized celebrity. We wanted to do it in more of a centralized way initially, where we had a stylist, a writer, a choreographer all coming together to push their wares through this vehicle of Miquela and have a situation where one plus one equals three or whatever, but in doing so you kind of got to create almost like governance, internal governance and tools for allowing how decisions get made because of their initial Rihanna say yes or no, or right or left. It's this collective body that's kind of what would Pixar would call a brain trust, trying to solve for what the best outcome is.

Patrick: [00:45:49] What's been the hardest decision that you've had to make in Brud's history?

Trevor: [00:45:53] The hardest decision we've had to make is probably when in our narrative and our cannon there's this prequel, this time before Miquela was self-aware, before she knew that she was a bunch of code written by this creepy character, Daniel Kane and that effectively was this moment where we were creating content. And no one really knew what was going on. We weren't revealed as a company. There was no Bermuda. There was no Daniel Kane. There was no evil players. And there was this hack moment where we decided to effectively wipe all of Miquela's socials and create a stink where people had to be like, wait, what's happening? What happened to this character? We don't know what it is and then reveal. And it was a very sensitive moment because there was a risk that we could do this thing and no one would care and that effectively would be all this work we had built would go to zero. And that was definitely a really difficult one. I think beyond that in the last four or five years coming in from so heightened politically and socially, that we've definitely goofed in trying to tell stories that we thought could better reflect the experience of the people that are helping to craft those stories in the name of trying to highlight issues that we think are important. And some of the decisions that we've had to make is like how far to push these boundaries. Grey's Anatomy dealing with the loss of a family member is something that's been established as like a medium where you can do that. But in doing that on social media, in between pictures of a latte and somebody in the bikini, how do we figure out how far we can go and how far we can't go? We're first to the door. So we're catching all the arrows there and making those decisions are actually quite difficult.

Patrick: [00:47:17] What's the furthest that you've ever pushed the envelope?

Trevor: [00:47:20] We made it a point early on that our characters may have a point of view. You know what I mean? Miquela has been extremely vocal in her political ideologies, from being pro-choice to encouraging people to go out and eat and write letters to their senators to support sex workers. I think going to some of the things that traditional media companies would have shied away from because they're polarizing. But we're interested in trying to tell stories that reflect the points of view of our characters and our team and trying to highlight issues that we think are important. Miquela has had Black Lives Matter in her Instagram bio for years, because we thought as an organization that it was important to highlight these things were going on. Obviously in a post-2020 world where things were so heightened, people are so aware of that, it feels timely. But the reality is we're going to have positions that are unpopular with some folks that we feel like as an organization that need to be heard, and that we can use our platforms to accelerate and champion messages that we think are important.

Patrick: [00:48:07] For you personally, what keeps you going? For me, it's doing this. I just like meeting exceptional people, learning from them, applying those lessons somehow, rinse and repeat, I'll do that forever. What's your equivalent? What is the thing that when you wake up or the thing that when it happens, there's the most bliss or flow or whatever you want to characterize it?

Trevor: [00:48:26] I'm really interested in new ideas and I'm really interested in creative and innovative people as a result. And I've sometimes joked with the peers that we kind of live in this Forever 21 economy, where a lot of the value that's being created by innovators is being captured by kind of fast followers, think rent seekers. And so the thing that I get most excited about, I think I wake up every day thinking about is how to create better outcomes for people that are actually innovating, that are pushing humanity forward, that are building better incidents for all of us. And so that means, yes, thinking about how we can create virtual characters that can effectively act as heat shields and enable the talents of people who otherwise would have been pushed to the outsides of Hollywood or whatever else. And that situation, we have people who didn't necessarily have the charisma, but had the singing voice, so they could like be pushed to the talented with Miquela. People who were incredible writers, but antisocial and couldn't exist in a writers' room who can now work with us, who are all of these misfits who are extremely talented and who kind of push their wares through this vehicle. And one that I'm really proud of is we don't have a lot of... You know, Miquela acts as a heat shield for a lot of these creative people. These are fragile, sensitive artist types. And you watch what happens then to those people when they become public figures. They get torn to shreds. And so we've been able to prevent, I think hopefully some of our folks Britney Spears shaving your head in the parking lot moment, because they have this heat shield of this character, this headless brand, Miquela push their wares through. And that's also why I think it's time to start thinking about crypto. The ability to kind of solve for my dream, which was information wants to be free, pirate stuff, go nuts, make media university accessible, but also being met as a 23 year old, like a broke musician who can't figure out a way to make a living. You know? You're like, wouldn't it be great if you could sell some stuff as well? The idea that NFTs and crypto enable the ability for people that own things individually, and it creates scarce media, but to also allow everyone to interact with it, that keeps me up at night. It's so exciting. That's how I would probably speak to what it gets my motor going.

New Media Characters Today
Patrick: [00:50:12] I'll ask a selfish question. So let's say I wanted to create a nerdy business and investing version of Lil Miquela. Warren Buffet is used by everyone. He's sort of the character, if you will, that's invoked to talk about business lessons or investing lessons or whatever, and we need a new character. Okay? So I think this is kind of universally true, actually. So let's say I wanted to create that character, but I don't want it to be an actual person. I want it to be an avatar or something like that. What advice would you give me? Where would you start? What matters most? What's the sequencing?

Trevor: [00:50:44] I would probably start with what's the cultural white space. And if you're going to ask me, I would say there are a bunch of disaffected young people who had to experience hyper-financialization that's destroyed their family's lives that have lived through late stage capitalist environment that doesn't feel very equitable, and as a result, have looked for answers all over the place. It's kind of like a meme among leftist circles where it's like, "Man, funny all of these big brain left this types held a bunch of crypto and were seemingly pretty interested in markets." Actually even saw a meme that was like, "When did this," and it's a picture of some book about modern monetary theory, "Get more sexy than this?" And it was the Last Capital or something like Karl Marx. I think there are an emergent subset of young people who are like, "Man, actually, some markets are cool and there are ways that these can be utilized."

So I'd probably start there if I was going to... I would say, "Look, here's an opportunity to speak to and maybe like a Glen Whale, radical market style way, how investing and how markets can be used to create better outcomes for people. And I would then use that voice to speak to their concerns and then give them opportunities, follow this person's lead, in the same way I think Warren Buffet's been able to take people on all of these Buffet memes. It's not timing the market, it's about time in the market or whatever else.

Patrick: [00:52:02] How do you think about the anatomy or the unit of media contribution? So Buffett's unit of contribution was the annual letter. Maybe the Instagram post is one unit of contribution. It seems like a lot of the most successful influencers, media, personalities, whatever you want to call them, have a format that they define and then often they ride for a long period of time. They sort of stick with the same creative container. How do you think about creative containers and experimentation versus doubling down and compounding on one that works?

Trevor: [00:52:31] Warren's lenders are super important, but we can't underestimate the value of the aesthetics. Looks like the grandpa from Up. He's driving around his old Lincoln in Omaha. If you were going to try to write who's the good guy in the movie when the disaster is going to happen, there's just one crotchety old guy who knows what's actually going to be right, it's boring. And so I think you have to couple of the aesthetics of Warren from the quotes and the letters, I would definitely start there as well. But I think for me, it seems like there's an opportunity to leverage memes to communicate far more effectively than you could... Obviously, there's a place for letters and long-form writing, but I think memes and infographics...

God, there's so many bad, misinformation infographics, but they're using because they're so effective. And I think even the Litquidities of the world or whatever else, they're quite good at conveying some of these dense concepts in ways I think people would be drawn to rather quickly. So that's what I'd probably go, focus on aesthetics and then speak to some of these things that I think intentionally make you feel dumb, but can be conveyed pretty quickly and eloquently via a meme.

Patrick: [00:53:28] Are you most excited about the future of what you are building personally?

Trevor: [00:53:32] For me, capitalization and finding underutilized talent, that's really personal to me. I literally grew up in a town where I never thought I could be anybody. I literally got into all these wonderful schools, couldn't afford to go. My family didn't even have the credit to qualify for some of the loans and just couldn't go because I grew up literally in the ghetto. I think there's an opportunity to leverage these toolings and this software to highlight and identify people that are very talented and allow them to create better outcomes for themselves and their families and allow them to express themselves in ways they wouldn't been able to otherwise. And while that's broad and a little opaque, but the reality is I think everyone in the world is a creator.

I think everyone has a story they need to tell. I think everyone has innovations that they can bring to the forefront. If they have the means and the time to see those things through, I think they'd all be better off. And so I like to enable some of that and I think that's the dream.

And do I think crypto's a save all savior and it's going to create more equity or solve inequality? No, but I hope that in this great reshuffling, we can shift a little bit more valued some of those people. And then that's kind of what I do is every day.

Patrick: [00:54:33] You mentioned the phrase earlier, American Dream. We've talked a little bit about your entire fascinating story, starting very humble beginnings and having led a fascinating life, very successful life by any measure. What's missing? You were able to walk a really interesting path. I think obviously what you just said is enabling that something like that path for a lot more people is really exciting. What are the pieces? Crypto maybe is one part of this. What's missing? What needs to change?

Trevor: [00:54:58] Man, I thought you're going to ask me what's missing in my life, and I'd have this existential breakdown in your podcast. What's missing in my life? There's a lot of user experience stuff. I think crypto is still pretty dense and clunky. I actually think, and this kind of lives a bit, I just said about it being too clunky, I think a lot of traditional web people want to obfuscate and kind of hide the blockchain because they think it's going to be too difficult for folks to understand. I think that's a bit paternalistic. And I think that there is people who have actually leaned the most in the blockchain. Even six months ago, we were discussing, people are going to say non-fungible tokens? It's too dense. It's never going to work. And now you can't walk a corner without NFTs said somewhere. And so I actually think that there are a few on-ramps installed for, but I think we're well experienced. Some of the core identity stuff is still a step too dense. There are little things. Adding custom tokens, playing with the exchanges, that kind of stuff is still a little bit too much friction. That UI UX stuff is going to get a lot more simple in the coming months and I think unlock a ton of value. I also think that there's a psychological change. I do feel like a lot of my creative peers have been conditioned to be hostile towards finance and towards business. And in the past, but when I was a kid, the idea of rap and rock coming together, crazy. The idea of Wall Street and the Lower East Side coming together, build product together, probably seems as crazy now. The best artists, the great people of the future are going to have a finance economic acumen that's going to allow them to build really novel, interesting things.

And I think we're going to need to allow and maybe nudge creative people especially to move away from some those predispositions. Candidly, some hostile conditioning we've had in the Trump era. People are so frustrated, we're so angry for so long. I was tweeting it almost feels like auto-immune response. We've been attacking the body ourselves for so long that we don't know how to stop. And I think that people are so predisposed to anger and contempt for new ideas and new things, they're going to need to kind of shake some of that to allow for some of these things to potentially be great outcomes for themselves.

Work Ethic
Patrick: [00:56:54] You said at the very beginning of the discussion, something about good old fashioned Midwestern work ethic. I'd love to just talk about work ethic a little bit. A friend of ours told me to ask you about you practicing your jump shot. And I'm fascinated by people with a specific kind of work ethic. And I'd love to hear what you've learned about that concept, and maybe about your jump shot.

Trevor: [00:57:14] This is probably the first one, like the shout out Coach Frecken in Iowa. I grew up with a mom who championed me and did everything she could for me and God bless her, but I was met by a football coach in eighth grade, coach in a high school called Bettendorf High School. And Coach Frecken was the first dude who basically told me that it wasn't anything. If I wanted to be something, I better put in the work, and also met that with an amount of love and care. I'll never forget, I had a basketball tournament, which was probably my first love, in Chicago, we had our first games at 10. We were going to leave at 7:00 AM from Iowa. I was supposed to lift that day on a Saturday for the football team at eight. And I told Coach Frecken, I was like, "Yeah, I can't make it. I got a basketball tournament in Chicago, and I'm not going to be there." And he was like, "What time's the tournament? Okay, what time you're leaving? You're leaving at seven? Cool, I'll be here at four. We'll get the workout in before you go." And I was like, "What?" And so I show up at 4:00 AM and here's this dude I don't really know clearly cares about me and wants you to be as good as I can be because he's going to work through this entire lift with me and then send me on my way, and instilled in me a lot of stuff that feels very blue collar Midwest. We had bulldog time, which wasn't on time. It's 15 minutes early. If you weren't 15 minutes early, you were late, and the entire team had to pay. All these things were beaten in my head, made it really easy for me to get up at 6:00 AM to get on a flight to go DJ somewhere. And beyond that, I think I learned that consistency is really key. It's easy to work hard in a sprint, but the ability to be really passionate about something and get up every day and make 500 threes like I've been doing recently, or running through my transitioning program because I have these pipe dreams of playing pro basketball somewhere in the world at some point, even if it's in Guam. So if any of your listeners out here own some basketball teams in Chile or whatever, holler, I'll come play. That's one of the bizarre things that I do amongst a whole set of different things. I just try to be super consistent and just try to learn a little bit every day and get a little bit better every day, every single thing that I do.

Patrick: [00:59:01] It's a hard question I'm sure, but if you had to pick a single business lesson that you believe very deeply based on your experiences in your career, what would that lesson be?

Trevor: [00:59:11] For me personally, it would be listen to yourself and embrace how different you are and embrace differentiation. I think that I am someone who you can imagine pitching a Sequoia board room doesn't look like your typical Stanford GSB kid. And I think I originally tried to pitch my business like I was, and I failed miserably, got a lot of nos. And when I approached it the way I approached it, this is who I am and this is what I want to do, I got a lot of yesses.

And I think that was the same was true in music. I spent time trying to chase recent pop hits and then the main things that I was really passionate about and that I cared about and pitched to myself, and those things were then met at the right time and had success there. And so to me, I think it is really understand who you are and lean into you hard. Don't be afraid of who you are. And I think if you're able to kind of convey that really effectively, you're going to find who appreciate you for what you are and are going to want to buy into what you do and back what it is that you want to build.

Patrick: [00:59:59] I love that answer. Great excuse to ask my traditional closing question. What is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Trevor: [01:00:06] I have so many examples of things that my mother has done for me. I don't speak to her a ton publicly, but we grew up extremely humble roots. And I'm thinking now, it's something I didn't really realize until I was 12 or 13, but I remember being probably eight years old and I had a younger sister and my mom made us SpaghettiOs. And I remember asking my mom and I was like, I was 13, I was like, "Yo, do you want to eat spaghetti with us?" And she's like, "No, no, no, honey, I already ate." And I remember later on in life realizing that she didn't eat, and that she made time and figured out a way to make sure that we could eat. And that same lesson and that same moment played out so many times in my life, whether it was her taking extra shifts so I could go to basketball camp, sending me on a plane to California and thinking about whatever it took so that I can go to the school by the good football team or whatever it was, that kind of stuff isn't lost on me. It's hard for me to pick one, but I think someone as selfless and as kind of my mother, it would be incredibly hard to choose. But all of those are good examples.

Patrick: [01:01:00] Wow. What an incredible story and what a fun conversation. I think we've really covered what makes all of this technology that we've been talking about for years so exciting for the future and this idea of growing up on the internet and of one being okay and working and actually being advantaged on the internet relative to one size fits many or one size fits all is such a cool discussion. So thanks for the great closing couple answers and all the great answers and insight. This has been a blast.

Trevor: [01:01:26] Thank you for having me, real pleasure.



Created by @mercedeschien

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
