
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released June 17th, 2021
Founder's Field Guide
Christina Cacioppo - Building the New Standard in Security
Christina Cacioppo is the founder of Vanta, a security and compliance software business founded in 2017. We cover the experiences that led her to launch Vanta, the strategy she took to build, price, and distribute the product, and we touch on her lessons from running a growing organization.

00:00:00
01:03:45
Introduction
Patrick: [00:02:06] My guest today is Christina Cacioppo, Founder of Vanta, security and compliance software business founded in 2017. In our conversation, Christina brings to life the idea of finding a problem that exists and fixing it. We dive into the experiences that led her to launch Vanta, the strategy she took to build, price, and distribute the product, and we touch on her lessons running a growing organization. I always admire the drive that founders have when they set off to build something. Christina fits that mold, and you'll hear how she embarked on a self-taught journey early in her career. I hope you enjoy this great conversation with Christina Cacioppo.

The Beginnings
So Christina, I think the most interesting place to begin our conversation is the background on your own interest in business writ large. How did you first decide that this was something you could be passionate about? And then I want to hear the formative experiences that led you to ultimately starting Vanta.

Christina: [00:03:00] It wasn't at all a foregone conclusion. So both of my parents were professors, academics, who... predominantly researchers, loved their research, have big labs, they're social scientists. And so, until I was probably 12 years old, I didn't really realize adults did different things with their lives, and then I thought I would be a professor until I was about 21, 22.

Well, a few things happened around then. One was during undergrad getting to travel a bit and just seeing the impact of technology. Specifically spent one early summer in Rwanda. It's so cliché now, but just seeing mobile phones and how they spread and the impact they had and the beginnings of mobile banking and realizing, "Oh, if I can walk through an ATM at Stanford, that's cool." But mobile banking when you're living in second tier city in Rwanda is just a totally different game changer.

So some of it was that, and some of it was also just seeing the buildup of the internet and all of that, and sort of realizing that building on the internet is just our generation railroads. And so if you want the most like interesting, quickly changing, challenging thing you can find, go build on the internet.

Patrick: [00:04:08] What was the first entree for you into this sphere professionally? What were you doing early on in your career? You did a lot of writing. It was really interesting. When we first met, me and my partner went back and read a lot of your early stuff, just to get a sense for your trajectory. Talk us through the early days of exploring this field of business.

Christina: [00:04:25] Twofold. So one, actually, an undergrad... I spent one summer interning at Google. It was in what was then Sheryl Sandberg land, online sales and operations. I was basically doing support for Google News, and it was a really formative summer in lots of ways, mostly because I realized there were really interesting jobs at Google and Google did really interesting things, and it was not at all the internship I had.

And so, that actually got me to go back to school and take a few more CS classes, because again, I felt like I couldn't get the jobs I wanted, but actually seeing them up close... it was formative there. I think the other part of my first job out of undergrad was at Union Square Ventures in New York. And that was dumb luck. USV, in classic USV fashion, put up a blog post that said, "Hi, we had a great analyst, but he had to move cities, so we need someone else. If you're interested, send us links to your web presence."

And I read that and thought it sounded crazy and who would actually get this job? But I actually... deep secret, not on LinkedIn. I actually had a job. Then, I was working as a management consultant. Did not like my job. Couldn't figure out if it was because I didn't like it or I was just being an angsty new grad, whatever it was. But anyway, with fitting in a large corporate tower in New York City, moving boxes on slides, and literally on the last day, just... "Screw it. This is not the life I thought I was promised," and sent USV four links a nascent blog, Doppler, still my favorite web service, Twitter might've been it. I don't even think I sent them LinkedIn. And they emailed me and asked me to come in and chat with them. And I was totally gobsmacked, but ended up in me spending two years at Union Square Ventures.

Patrick: [00:06:09] What do you take from that time most? That's a incredible group of investing partners there. I don't know what they were investing in at the time that you were there, but what were the lessons that somehow impacted how you've done things at Vanta that you learned at USV?

Christina: [00:06:21] So I was there 2010 to 2012. This was the era of large networks of engaged users, as we called them. I think I joined right before the Foursquare investment, but that was as a New Yorker, the company I still think of as 10gen, which is Mongo. So that arc of companies and a few things. So one is, I really don't like top-down market sizing, which I think I got something from USV, because right when you're trying to top down market size a check-in app to go find your friends in the East Village, you just can't do it. So you're thinking about that more from first principles from, is this a behavior that people will adopt? Who are these people? That sort of thing. So I think there's that piece from them. I also think... I haven't figured out how to work this one into Vanta yet, but a curiosity and openness to new business models.So actually, I didn't know the word SaaS when I was there. And I think that's more a reflection of me than the firm, certainly. Yeah, you can have a subscription, but is there a way to turn this into our marketplace? Is there a per transaction way to think about this? USV really, really liked nonstandard business models because there's a lot of talk of that's where a lot of the innovation can come from, and maybe it's technology that opened this up, but that's one of the key parts of the innovation, a deep appreciation for that from USV.

Patrick: [00:07:41] What happened after USV? What was the next stage of your learning journey?

Christina: [00:07:45] So I was somewhat confused about a year in, because part of me really liked early stage venture. It was all the parts about being an academic that I thought I liked. And could be a journalist, too. You get paid to run around and learn about new things and call people up and ask them questions, and then they come in and very politely answer all your questions. And it was just tremendous racket. So, there were part of it I really liked. The part I didn't like, because I felt like I was young and full of energy and just wanted to go do things and write... go build on the railroads, back to that analogy. Instead, I was learning a lot, but sitting there and learning a lot rather than doing. But you know USV, great firm, great people, great opportunity, but ultimately decided I just really wanted to be one of the people who came in and pitched rather than someone who is pitched to.

I guess another part of it, I had just been really fortunate to basically spend two years straight meeting with different entrepreneurs, 10 of them a week, every week for two years. I got to see all the different models of a founder, the similarities and differences...how many different models there are and dumb this sounds, but how you don't have to look like or talk like Mark Zuckerberg or be Mark Zuckerberg to be very successful. But I had one last hangup, which was I couldn't code. And I know lots of people start technology companies without being able to code, but I couldn't get over that. So for USV, I took my bonus from one year and just lived off it for... stretched it over two years, taught myself to code, built a bunch of stuff, none of which you have heard of or anyone has heard of, but learned some amount of how to build products and just experimented with a bunch of different stuff.

Patrick: [00:09:19] I love these kinds of periods in people's lives, where it's completely at your own direction. And you're learning something probably pretty fast that the learning curve is probably pretty steep. What were you doing? What did you learn? How did you approach being self-taught and something like that? Give us the juicy details here.

Christina: [00:09:34] So I realized with myself, structure is helpful. And so I basically tricked myself into thinking I had a job. Chris Dixon actually was in New York at the time, New York City entrepreneur well-known, and he's really good at taking in young entrepreneurs. And so he had recently sold his company Hunch to eBay, had this huge office in New York, eBay, New York that's flagship. And I emailed him and was like, "Hey, can I have a desk?" And he's like, "Sure, come on over." Actually, eBay happened to be almost literally across the street from USV. So I tried not to change things. I woke up, I got dressed. I walked to work, just walked across the street to eBay. I sat in one of the eBay New York desks with the... Hunch's eBay software engineering team. They did their work, I did mine. Mine was starting with how to make a blog tutorial that Steve Hussmann of Reddit fame had online, and I made this blog.

And then it was like, "Okay, now I actually want a book website." Then I started changing rather than writing blog posts, putting books on shelves. There's probably six, seven months where I just sat there and did that. And it was great. And the Hunch engineers, Hunch-eBay engineers, were so kind and friendly and they would tease me when I wouldn't come in one day. "Where were you yesterday?" And you're like, "I don't have a job," but it was just... the ruse kept going for pretty long, and that was just extraordinarily helpful.

Patrick: [00:10:52] So then, what's the next step from that experience? Now we can get to the the founding origins of Vanta.

Christina: [00:10:59] Florida.

Patrick: [00:10:59] How did you go from-

Christina: [00:11:00] There were four years in between. Yeah.

Patrick: [00:11:03] Describe that four year... what happened in those four years? But now we can start to really tie this to what you're doing now.

Christina: [00:11:08] So, one of those Hunch-eBay engineers, knew from undergrad. We spent more time together. We both decided we wanted to try to start a startup. We didn't know what we wanted to do the startup around, but we wanted to see if we liked working together. So we figured we would work on a side project. Our side project was... can't keep a straight face. Was an owl-themed video messaging app. 2013, why wouldn't you do that? This was going to be a month long project to see if we liked each other. Move on, nine months later, I think we both woke up and were like, "Why are we making this? We actually do like working together, but what are we doing with our lives?" That was an interesting art. The owl era. This person actually now works at Vanta as our head of engineering, so full circle, but there a lot of owls initially. There was the owl era. Matt ended up joining Dropbox.

Then I was sort of frustrated with myself and I left to go start something, and then I ended up on this owl detour, but I want to go do the real thing. So I spent another year or so, a little less, working on different ways to make software engineering easier to learn. Made some stuff that I think is interesting. Also realized through that what I was working on was definitely not a business. So I ended up also joining Dropbox. It was actually the first time I had worked at a real company, and so learned a lot of just what is a company and what does a marketing person do and what does cross functional alignment mean and joking, but not, it was really my first real job in a lot of ways.

Patrick: [00:12:38] Okay. Now we can get to the first encounter with the problem that Vanta now solves for its customers. This is one of those businesses that when I first encountered it, I love these sorts of things. It's like this deep intractable problem that more and more companies have talked about not wanting to top downsize the market. How did you come across software security as something that was interesting, a problem space that you were willing to spend your life and career in? What was the first encounter?

Christina: [00:13:06] Yeah, so there are two meetings we'll encounter. So first one at Dropbox. So I was working on Dropbox Paper, Dropbox's version of Google Docs, a real-time collaborative editor. The product and tech came in through an acquisition, which means it was totally separate than the rest of Dropbox. We as a six, seven person team thought this was the best thing in the world because we weren't slowed down by the monolith that was Dropbox in year 10 of its life. It was all great until we started trying to launch it. And it wasn't even launched with fanfare and PR. We just wanted users. We had basically pulled every string of getting someone's partner or roommate or college friend or trying to use the product, but we really weren't having a ton of success with the initial users. I was going to say, you can tell I've never worked at a company before. I went to the account management team and it was just like, "Hey, account managers, could you give this away to your customers?"

And the account managers are like, "Game on. I call people up all day and ask them for more money. I would love to send them something new." So we had this great thing going over lunch basically until legal realized what I was doing, came, and they were like, "Hello, do you know what a contract is?" And I was like, "No. What, about a piece of paper? What's going on?" And they were very polite and very good at doing their jobs to be clear, but basically, came and were like, "Look, the Dropbox contracts say Dropbox products are secure and compliant and pen tested and this, that, and the other, and you've got a nice prototype over there, kind of a science experiment, that is in fact, none of these things. So you either need to meet the bar that we've established, or you can't talk to anyone who pays for Dropbox." Then you're like, "Oh, okay, well what's this bar, what are these things?"

And you go and you learn about what SOC 2 is or HIPAA. And you've learned just what a pain it is. And we costed it out really high level and we're like, "Okay, we could pause product development for a year, year and a half, go get these things, and then come back and try to find product market fit," basically, "Or we can just not do this stuff, go find our own users," and that's ultimately the path we took. But I think there was just this moment of, "Wait, wait, wait, we're Dropbox. And we're Dropbox at the height of Dropbox's power. How does this take us a year and a half? How are we so blocked by this?"

What is Security Compliance
Patrick: [00:15:20] So give us the background just because a lot of people won't be familiar. We will focus on SOC 2 to start. What is that? What are the origins of SOC 2? What does it mean? What does it do? Why was it so hard to get? Let's do a deep dive here.

Christina: [00:15:31] Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's actually now an initialism. It doesn't stand for anything.

Patrick: [00:15:35] Really?

Christina: [00:15:36] Of course, just to make it more confusing. It used to stand for stuff, then we, I guess, decided not. Origins are with accountants. So it's a standard controlled by the American Institute of CPAs, and it started with the computerization of a lot of financial systems. Basically, your accountants will come in and check your books, and if you've done... followed accounting rules, that's happened for a long time, that's grand. Then maybe '90s or so, they started coming in as, again, as there were like digitalization and just software for some of this. Are your accounting rules being followed and your financial controls being followed in the software you're using? And that was a SOC 1. And it was, again, all accounting rules implemented in software. There's been a few iterations, but kind of mid-two thousands, I think.

Honestly, I think it was TAM expansion by the accountants. Where they were like, look, we're checking for accounting rules in software, why don't we check for other rules in software? And so then they started checking for security controls, what are basically just commitments, in software. And they started doing those audits. They called it SOC 2, I think, sort of like a Java and JavaScript thing. They're not actually that related, we're just TAM expanding and like using the recognizable name to go to the second one.

It was really successful TAM expansion, honestly. Because the accountants would come in then, and they're like, look, we're going to do the financial stuff, the SOC 1 thing. And then we'll tack on the SOC 2 piece, this technical piece. And so it just became a bit of a defacto standard for when you get the one thing that you get, you'll get the second one. And so it sort of, that I think started the snowball rolling of people knowing that this was the standard that they needed to get.

Patrick: [00:17:10] Let's rewind time and say, I got a SOC 2, what is it? Certification, is that the right word? So some, effectively like an auditor came in, tested my software for some set of things. I want to know what those things are. And I passed or I didn't. And then that certification bought me something. So let's talk through each of those. Like first, what literally were they testing for? Like, what is security in software mean? That's kind of a big question.

Christina: [00:17:33] Step one was, historically was, if you're a company and you wanted a SOC 2, you would call up a consultant. The consultant would ask you questions about what sorts of security things you did. Like how you secured customer data, how you talked about employees who had access to what systems, if you had cloud infrastructure, an AWS account, how you set that up. They would ask you what you wanted to do, and then they would come back and basically give you a list of a hundred controls in compliance speak, just security rules that you should follow.

So every employee has two factor on their email, all data's encrypted at rest, stuff like that. You used to have a hundred of these things. And yeah, step one was, choose your own adventure, make your own list. And again, there's some light guidance on what those things should be, but it's very light. But then you have this list of rules. Okay, then the consultant says, hey, go make sure these are all in place. And when you're good, call in your auditor. And your auditor is a CPA, like it is an accountant.




 

Source: Imperva

Patrick: [00:18:29] That's so strange.

Christina: [00:18:30] Yes. There's CPA's that sort of specialize in this, but fundamentally they are accountants. That's the bulk of their professional education, so you get the outcomes you might imagine from that. So anyway, the company goes and scurries around and does all the things they said they would. And then the auditor comes in and they basically say, okay, you say you have two factor on everybody's email account, prove it to me. You'll be like, oh, okay, let me pull up my admin dashboard of G Suite or Office 365 or whatever it is. Show them the employee list, and you'll show them all the check marks next to MFA in the column. And they'll say, well, that looks good, but how do I know that's the full employee list? And you say, oh, one moment. And then you like pull up your payroll system and you get your list of employees.

And then the accountant is like, okay, this person, this person, this person. And they're like, ah, but you forgot the intern, Sally. Ah shoot, the intern Sally. I'm joking, but this is kind of the thing. And it takes two weeks of like someone sitting there and like comparing lists. Yeah, you just look at that as like, someone even adjacent to software. And you're just like, what are we doing?

Why SOC 2 Is Needed
Patrick: [00:19:31] And so literally that process would, and maybe in some, a lot of cases, still does, can take a year for a new product with big enterprise clients. So now, let's talk about the other side. Who demands a SOC 2? Like this has become, so it's become a standard--

Christina: [00:19:45] Yeah, why do you go through this? It sounds fun but why do you?

Patrick: [00:19:49] But you do it for good reason, like you want to sell to somebody. So talk us through that side of the marketplace, I guess I'll call it. Who demands this and why, and how did that come to be?

Christina: [00:19:58] Yeah. So again, this isn't a legal standard at all, like no laws. It's actually a really interesting example of like how this became a defacto standard, just like in the industry. So who demands it tend to be, I mean it used to be really big companies, but it's basically people who bought software. And some part of buying software procurement is doing risk assessment or a security analysis. And so you're company buying software, you're probably buying a lot of software. And so you have a team internally that's basically like, is this a good vendor? If we give them a bunch of data, will they leave it on the internet, or like, can we trust them? SOC 2 has become the shorthand answer to that, are they trustworthy? And I think it's like, well, do they have a SOC 2? And I think it's a little bit of what SOC 2 tests for, but, also honestly, a lot of organizational maturity. They had the organizational maturity to deal with the consultant, and deal with the auditor, and convince everybody they're reasonable, so they're probably less likely to be doofusses. But yeah, it's all commercial pressure, all from the buyers,

Patrick: [00:20:57] Incredible that it's almost like heuristic has become such a key step for being able to sell software in big contracts. So you faced this situation at Dropbox and you made the decision to not hit pause for a year. So it materially kind of affected a product trajectory. So then when you started Vanta how did you think about attacking this problem to take something, I think of Josh Wolfe's what sucks question. Like clearly this process sucked, or sucks to do this manual static, once per X period of time, deep audit. How did you think about productizing something that would make that a lot better? What were the earliest first steps?

Christina: [00:21:34] Yeah, actually backing up one moment, there's a second key moment around why I was to start this company. Which was to left Dropbox late 2016, early 2017. And to take you back there, this was like 2016 election, everybody had emails everywhere. Equifax had just happened. Uber had just left a bunch of data open on the internet, DNS three bucket.

And we we started looking around and going like, hey, everyone said... Like, if you want to think about macro trends to go bet on, more security sounds like a great one, or net security seems like a great one. But then you look around and see, like we're not very good at internet security. And there's definitely difficult things, but these breaches seem to happen for, well, you left the front door open, you left the storage bucket open. And like yes, somebody came and found it. What do you kind of expect? And so how do you reconcile that? Everyone says security on the internet is really important. There's more and more effort around it, sort of, but also we get breached for these reasons that don't seem that hard, what's going on. And so just started talking to people about it and sort of realized two things.

One, I mean, a lot of this stuff is hard because, trying to use the tortured analogy, but like you have thousands of front doors that you can leave open. And so closing all of them is actually the hard part, even though any one looks sort of trivial.And the second part was just prioritization. A business, especially one that is growing or wants to grow, will prioritize things that let it grow. And stopping and being like, one moment, can I check door number 4,000, is just hard to prioritize and kind of doesn't get done until, to your point, you're trying to sell to someone bigger.

You're trying to like move up market, expand your market, grow more. And someone says, hey, you'd need this SOC 2 thing in order to do that. Then you're going to go back and do everything really quickly. The joke about Vanta that's not really a joke is it's a security company masquerading as a compliance company. But it was just because we saw compliance as such a powerful behavior motivator for businesses that wanted to grow.

Patrick: [00:23:32] Okay. So now there's a potential to do one of my favorite things, which is take this manual, person-heavy, pen and paper, static process, and turn it into a digital software based streaming process. How did you attack that problem? There's probably lots of ways that you considered doing that and starting this thing, so how did you deliberate how to start this thing? What did V1 look like?

Christina: [00:23:57] So big problem, so I sort of mentioned this, the old pre-Vanta, the way you got one of these things was step one, talk to a consultant. Look deep inside your soul, like figure out a hundred things you should do. And one, that's just a lot of overhead and a lot of learning, especially for a harried CTO who's trying to do 14 other things. And second, if you're thinking about building software against it, building software against a moving list that's different for every company is not super easy.

Truly, actually the first thing we tried to do was standardize the list. And it was, like honestly, some amount of naivete. When we talked to people who are in the industry, they're like you can't do that. And then we're pushed on it, somewhat out of a naivete and somewhat out of just being product people and software engineers. And we're like the way, again, Dropbox protects customer data be all that different than the way Segment protects customer data? No, there's just best practices here, and everyone should just be reasonable.

So our very first version was a spreadsheet of here's a SOC 2 standard, really high level. Here's what we think you need to do, and here's how far away you are from doing it. We did this for a friend's company. And really just trying to test, one, could we make the spreadsheet? Two, did they believe our spreadsheet? So we did this for one company, it's actually Segment. We walked in, didn't charge them for it because we didn't really know what to do. And I think they let us do it because they knew us and were like, well, you're smart people who will work hard. We're not quite sure why you're working on the SOC 2 thing, but sure, it might be useful.

Anyway, so we made a crazy color-coded spreadsheet, whatever, gave it to them. They actually seemed moderately pleased with it. Then we went to another friend's company, went to Front. And the trick there was like, okay, we're going to try to use our old spreadsheet, but just take out the Segment pieces and put it in the Front pieces and see if they actually match, right? Like, can we standardize? So we did that. It was much faster. It took three days, not 15, basically. Front seem to like it reasonably much. And then at that point, actually we got an email from someone at Dropbox, basically saying we should probably get a drink. It seems like you've become SOC 2 consultants, super weird life choice. Anyway, so like worried about you. Also, can you do this for my startup? But like seriously, maybe I should have an intervention after you do the work for me? Which actually seemed like, oh, this is great. Which is like people think we're nuts, but you actually want the thing. Game on.

Patrick: [00:26:06] Perfect.

Christina: [00:26:06] Yeah. I really think this is proceeding according to plan. But this is actually also a USV thing. Like when people think you're nuts, you're actually on the right track--

Patrick: [00:26:13] But still want the thing? Yeah.

Christina: [00:26:15] Exactly. You're on the right track. What is the chicken of SaaS apps but compliance software? So, actually, at that point we're like, ooh, we're not going to go give this person a spreadsheet, but we are going to go start writing code to try to turn our spreadsheet into software.

The Use of Spreadsheets
Patrick: [00:26:30] I guess, first question would be, what the most valuable things were about using spreadsheets first? We've talked about this a lot before, where the value of just understanding what you're doing in sort of a manual, using existing tools way, is a really smart way to build product. Just say a little bit more about why you think that's so valuable and others might want to do that same thing.

Christina: [00:26:49] Spreadsheets are really easy to change. And code, I mean, it's changeable, but it takes much longer to change. So that's like just, you just have infinity flexibility, relatively, with spreadsheets. We didn't know what we should check for. And so you're just like add rows, delete rows, move them around, whatever. Whereas when you're doing that in code, you're like talking about data models, you're talking about migrations, and moving things around. And it's, again, it's all, you can change anything in software. It's not that, it just takes so much longer.

And so in the early stages, when you sort of don't know what you're doing, and that's fine, I think you just want to index on like infinity flexibility.

I think there's also a user expectations piece. If you can, again, color code a spreadsheet and try to make it look pretty. But people's expectations are pretty low, spreadsheet. Whereas if you start showing them things on a web browser, you start getting, oh, that's an ugly font. Oh, the spacing is off. And like, yeah, the spacing is off, and it's ugly. But you're no, no, no, don't pay attention. What do you actually think would be content? And it's just harder to pull those things apart for someone.

Patrick: [00:27:48] Okay, I'm totally fascinated by how something then gets into software. Especially in your case, because it's something around security. So like people are going to hold you to a very high standard, given that you're doing something for them which is so sensitive. How do you sort of ham and egg it to make sure that you're getting customers, the products good enough, and it's in software? And what does software mean? Maybe now we can talk about this static to streaming concept.

Christina: [00:28:11] Okay. So first version of Vanta was a simple, like two field form to put in your AWS credentials. We will scan your third word for it, you'll like look at the configuration in your AWS account, and then generate a report. It was sort of like generating our spreadsheet basically. And so we're like, oh yeah, just put in the credentials. And you know, the software is a little slow, so we'll send you the report tomorrow.

Meanwhile, behind the scenes, it's not much software. So we would get the credentials. We would go look at the AWS configuration, splat out all the information. And then I would go through and like read the big data blob and like write the report. That was the V1 of software. And then, send it to people, and be like, oh, sorry, yeah, yeah, we're just a little slow, but here's your thing. And they mostly believed us. They didn't, I think, think too hard. It's just like two people on the couch, what's going on over there. But then the next year or so was actually taking the, here's this configuration information from AWS, how do you actually filter it all the way through into like a report and the tests and all of that? But yeah, the first version is just totally manual.

Patrick: [00:29:21] Talk through the static and streaming idea. So is it fair to think about that original spreadsheet? Let's just, for argument's sake, say there's 100 items on that spreadsheet. The exercise then is basically trying to take the end thing that's in the spreadsheet cell and map it back to the thing that determines its source programmatically. Like, are you just doing that sort of one by one? And, therefore, like once you have those hooks built, you can sort of tell someone any day automatically if they're SOC 2 compliant versus like having some human go through and compare Sally's intern account to your database?

Christina: [00:29:52] The static piece, and like, again, the way, joking but not, when you have someone in there looking at Sally's intern account and all this, it's very point in time. It's what's the state of the world when I walked into your office? And there is a continuous, sort of continuous SOC 2, take two. But continuous means, hey, I'm going to just come in a few times. I'm going to come in today, I'm going to come in next Tuesday, I'm going to come in next month. And if you like survive my spot checks, I'm going to say your continuous.

Which again, when you look at this from a software perspective, you're like that's still point in time. It's just three points in time. The core of Vanta we call tests. And this has actually become something of an industry standard. Tests are not at SOC 2 concept, they're a Vanta concept. And the idea of a test is, okay, you have the statement, everybody has two factor in their email. And then Vanta wrote a test that said, okay, here's my employees, here's all the two factor information. Does everybody have two factor? Yes, no.

And that is just the core of our software and what we do. And again, it was kind of applying the like software engineering mindset to the compliance thing. Where ultimately you're like, you are testing whether these statements are true. And again, because it's software, we just run our tests all the time, hundreds of times a day. Which is not something a person, a person has to go into the office and check, or even like pull up a dashboard and check. They're going to get tired. They're going to go on vacation. They're not going to do this every day. But our code just doesn't get tired. And so it can be your streaming where you're just like constantly getting information about configuration, constantly checking it. And surfacing what's kind of set up correctly and what's set up incorrectly all the time.

Patrick: [00:31:25] The way to think about it might be... I love the idea code doesn't get tired. A company is effectively giving you access to the system, the internal systems, that they would give to a SOC 2 auditor, in order to check their compliance. And Vanta, via software, is able to do this constantly and programmatically. That's kind of the simple, we'll talk about the things that might happen in the future soon here, but in a simple sense, that's what you do for customers?

Christina: [00:31:51] Yeah. It's kind of twofold. And again, we didn't, like now I can articulate this a few years in. Step one was just standardizing the list of stuff. Add and remove stuff on the edges, but 80/20 it. And then step two is like, yeah, how is everything looking? And so if you're customer, you're an engineering customer particularly, you're getting monitoring and alerting. How are things? What's off? How should I fix it? Et cetera. To an auditor, you're getting evidence. You're getting proof that such and such was in place over whatever time period you want.

How Vanta Changes the SOC 2 Process
Patrick: [00:32:18] Who's left? Are you replacing auditors? Are there still auditors? How much faster does this go as one versus the other pre-post Vanta? What could I expect? If you were back at Dropbox in the story you told us and Vanta existed somehow externally, what would your experience have been?

Christina: [00:32:33] Much faster. Again, it's sort of a few fold. One is just reducing the complexity of what you need to do. Again, making that standardized and much easier to understand. It sort of gets at the, Joel Spolsky commoditize and complement stuff, but just like if you can make stuff simpler, you're just dropping time costs, the actual cost. There's that piece of it. There is, from the monitoring piece. A big part of compliance projects in a pre-Vanta world are just people running around and saying "Is stuff in good shape today?" Or "The auditor's coming in next week. I need to do an audit myself before the auditor comes in so I can make sure everything's okay."

There's just so much work about work with it, because when you think about one of these projects, there's, you talked about with the engineering pieces, but there's HR pieces, there's legal pieces, there's IT stuff. It's actually pretty broad. It's a huge cat herding component so you don't go in, so the auditor doesn't come in and find unfortunate things. Then, there's what used to be screenshots. Right? Oh, the auditor is screenshot from this system, screenshot from this system manually like diffing them in their heads. All of that time can go away too.

Patrick: [00:33:39] What, for let's just say it's a Greenfield customer, something I'm looking at for a couple of businesses I'm involved with is getting SOC 2 compliance. From a cold start, like if I came to Vanta, how quick does that process go? Assuming like some maturity of our systems and we're not just pure fledgling, what does that feel like?

Christina: [00:33:54] We've had two person companies, like proverbial two founders on a couch knock it out in basically a week. Bigger companies often, right, because there are multiple owners, someone owns this piece versus that piece, there's again, the coordination, probably a medium customer, if they're motivated, two months or so. It's quite fast.

Patrick: [00:34:12] Is there a downside to that, that you've experienced? Sometimes there's this like too good to be true, it used to take me a year and a half, now it takes me a week, like skepticism that it's real?

Christina: [00:34:23] Oh, we definitely get the skepticism. Yeah. Yeah. It's actually deeper from folks who've gone through one of these audits. Because they're like, "No, no, no, no. I did the 18 month version. Like what are you talking about?" Very long Vanta, but actually think it just speaks to like broader the trends we ride or just like dashboards are really powerful. Information is really powerful. Having a streaming, up-to-date sense of where you are and then putting that in front of motivated employees, stuff gets done way faster. Actually, I think it's much more apt in a lot of ways.

Building a Business around SOC 2
Patrick: [00:34:52] Now we've gotten this really cool backstory and sort of the core idea of what the product does. Now, I'd love to talk a little bit about how you've built a business around this concept. The first thing I always like to tackle is, all right, you've got something that's a clearly much better solution than the incumbent solution. It's like a painkiller, not a vitamin, it's something people have to do if they want to sell to bigger companies. How did you first roll out what I'll call like sales and pricing? How did you figure out what to charge people, how to charge them, how to sell to them? This is always trial and error it seems like. How did you learn here?

Christina: [00:35:25] Vanta still prices this way, so good and bad. Okay. Late 2017. We had the Wizard of Oz website basically, so generously lots scurrying in the background. Sent this to about 10 friends who had companies and had them use it, gave them a little bit of like, "Oh, okay. Here's how we'll get your information. Here's your Vanta dashboard. Right? Here's what you can do with it internally, externally when you're selling whatever." Let them, kind of poked at them a little bit for a week or two and then called everyone back up one by one and got them on the phone and like ran through this semi-structured survey, which was basically like, "So what did I give you? What is Vanta? You tell me? Was it useful? Why? And then monetizing innovation book, which I actually really like, what is an expensive price, a reasonable price, and a prohibitively expensive price to pay for this thing that I gave you?" Asked 10 people this and then sat back.

It was actually pretty impressive where, one, people actually explained Vanta to me the way I kind of thought they would. This was actually something of a light bulb moment. I like distinctly remember that feeling, to the earlier conversations spent years building things no one wanted, literally years, and sort of like give something to someone and them have be like, "Oh, it's all the words you want me to say back."

Wait, how'd that happen? Then, basically centered on this price of, these are all baby startups, but like kind of $10,000 was like roughly what people told me. Definitely a drop the phone moment in there. You're like, "Wait, wait this is like the jankiest website. What do you mean that it's worth five figures?" But that was the basis of our pricing for kind of up until today.

Patrick: [00:37:05] Once you establish that and obviously it starts to work, people start paying you five figures or whatever to do this check for them, how did you think through, and this is an ongoing question I'm sure, the business model? I'm sure auditors got paid. They came in and did the check, they got paid. Maybe they came in again next year. How do you approach business model innovation thinking back to your USC days again here in terms of one-time costs, recurring revenue, SaaS, usage. How do you think about all this stuff?

Christina: [00:37:34] One question we often get is like, "Hey, isn't this a one time thing and have you just glued a SaaS model on top of it?" Because that's what the cool kids do in the early 2020s, late 2010s. I usually don't think that is. I don't think that is, because to your point the historic way to do this was auditors and they charge you annually and it's not subscription revenue, but they have you sign kind of three-year contracts. We came in with a subscription, but again it wasn't totally unnatural with it. The sort of pillars are one, yes, you want to get ready for your SOC 2 initially or whatever compliance audit. Then, two just the continuous monitoring. There is just value to having something going and checking, have you kept all of your doors and windows locked at all times?That is still where we are today. It is, our pricing is tremendously unsavvy, somewhat of a point of pride, but also just kind of an embarrassment at this point. It's been interesting to watch the industry standardize around some of our pricing. It's just one of those good reminders it is easier to create the world you want than it ever seems. Just universal law that pricing should look like this, and you're like, "No, I called five friends in 2017 and like here everyone is." There's just so much like the butterfly flapped its wings in all of this.

Anyway, I think that's like a helpful reminder. I try to remind people at Vanta of that of just like we can change all these things for good and bad, but in terms of future business model innovation, there's some stuff we're playing with. I'm actually really excited about this. I think there's sort of the obvious SaaS stuff of, well, why don't we have pricing scale somehow with company size in some sort of autopilot way? Per user, some sort of metered billings. I think that probably is where SaaS pricing is going. There's definitely stuff there, but I also think there's some other kind of more interesting things we can do too.

Sales Organizations
Patrick: [00:39:17] We talked a bit about pricing. I want to come back to the roadmap and the future, but first I'd love to hear what you've learned about effective sales organizations. You're selling this thing, and you're marketing it too, but you are selling it. What practices have you adopted successfully or unsuccessfully and what innovations do you think you've created given that what you're doing is fairly unique?

Christina: [00:39:38] One model I have generally is actually the go-to-market side of a company is much more like engineering, not in software engineering, I mean like industrial engineering, you have a system, it has inputs, there's transformations, there's conversions, you have outputs, and you can measure and optimize all of that. That is my model for the go to market side of a company, I think the actual engineering side, like the eng product design side, that is much more like art. If you tried to turn that into a system with inputs and outputs, it doesn't work. What do I think about sales? I do think about it as sort of a system leads come in, right, there's conversions at different stages, and then you have customers that go out. Then you're just, okay, how can you track and measure and understand differences at each stage and do that? That's my broad framework for sales.

I think more specifically, so I sold the first few hundred thousand dollars worth of Vanta have been far outstripped by many, many salespeople at Vanta at this point. For good and bad, I sell like a product manager. "Hey, I made this thing. What do you think of it? Is it a need? Can I ask you all these questions about how you think about the world?" I end up actually being like really strong, what salespeople call qualification, what I would call need finding, but it comes out of like a product managers desire to understand them. I can sometimes get way too far in the weeds of that and the other part, and be like, "Oh, I have another shiny thing to show you." And someone's like, "No, I just want a contract." "Right, right. Sorry. Yeah, that's why we're talking." That's kind of funny, but I think there was a part of that, especially in the very early days because we sold and sell to CTOs. There was just a part of credibly being able to talk about things, answering the really minute questions. One early customer sort of described us as this babble fish between engineering and compliance, which I actually really liked, because when we think about our users, they're engineers who smart, motivated, capable, can learn all the things, but also are just doing 97 other things at once. Do they want to go learn all the nuances of compliance? Absolutely not. They just want to get the thing done. To the extent Vanta can be that translation layer between them, it's actually a really powerful and really helpful place to be. We can speak compliance to one audience and then we speak engineering to another.

Patrick: [00:41:51] A really interesting business model idea, like helping to parts of other companies communicate better is an incredible unlock. I won't forget that one. If you think back on the history so far, what was the biggest nightmare to build? Not necessarily build, but just like accomplish, what was the hardest hill to take?

Christina: [00:42:09] Yeah, I think, I mean, we're still working through this, but a SOC 2 covers so much. Again from who is hired at a company, what role do they have? What access to systems should they have? How is our AWS account set up? What do the employee laptops look like? There's just so much stuff. There's a part of this that was very compelling to me, initially, because I'm a bit of a shiny objects person. I love learning about new things. One of the things, one of the USV partners, Brad, actually told me as I was leaving was he was like, "Look, go off and do what you're going to do. You're going to be great and all these good words, but also you, Christina, are going to struggle with just choosing one thing because you like so many things." It's actually deeply true.Anyway, I'll just say SOC 2 and compliance has a bunch of different things to go think about, which is fun, but there is just so much stuff. There's so much stuff to build. There is so much stuff to maintain. We have so much product surface area and it's because the kind of lasso around it all is compliance. It's not actual tool category. We are several tools bundled into one. There's just a lot of stuff and a lot of complexity there.

Competitive Advantage
Patrick: [00:43:16] It's interesting though that if anything, that's probably a good thing from a competitive standpoint. I'd love to hear now how you think about building competitive advantage into the business as you grow and make the product better at the same time. There's other SOC 2 software companies. Now, you are a pioneer, but there's other people that I can go to and bid this work out to or something. If you're going to be a super successful business longterm, you want some growing compounding advantage. How do you think about that and how do you deliberately build one?

Christina: [00:43:46] Twofold that I'll share out about, and it's like a constant conversation internally at Vanta, as you might imagine. One is actually on the commoditization piece. Just like, can we drop the cost of getting a SOC 2 generally? I think we have, maybe slightly less the dollar costs, but very much the time and effort costs and mental overhead piece. This is standardizing, standardizing what a SOC 2 is, how you prove it, what these pieces are. This helps us. Also, I think makes it easier for some competitors to build on. I think actually the important part, it is Vanta standard way and other people can totally use that. Who is defining what the industry needs? That's Vanta, because that's what we've always done. Back to the early days of "Here's a very rigid list of things to do." There's some amount of, like the Wizards of the Coast example always gets used here, but right, they like standardized some of the game design pieces. Then there was like a lot more game design.

Patrick: [00:44:39] What's that Wizards of the Coast thing?

Christina: [00:44:40] Okay, Wizards of the Coast is the company behind Magic the Gathering. They have a game with like eight sided die where they like sort of like open source the game design here, and so then lots of people made games with eight sided die, but theirs was actually always the most popular. Rising tide lifts all boats, more people know how to play their game. It probably actually disproportionately helped them, even though it also created, lowered the barriers to entry in a way, but they were like--

Patrick: [00:45:07] That's a really interesting answer. Do you think there's a fair analogy here to something like a ratings agency? I'm trying to think of other standard bearers or like an index provider in investing like S&P or Russell or something like this? Do you think there's some analogy there to pull on?

Christina: [00:45:20] Yeah, very much so. These are all little colored, but people talk about like the Better Business Bureau and those ratings and credit ratings for consumers, FICO scores, Moody's Bond Ratings. In some ways, I think this is broadly similar to the purpose a SOC 2 serves. Do we think Moody's is the most rigorous thing in the entire world? No. Is it tremendously useful and do lots of people rely on it? Yes, the rough heuristic. I think what we're trying to do is to stay a more nuanced version of that of are you baseline, reasonably secure, baseline have the organizational muscle to go through one of these intense audit processes? That, you can get from a SOC 2. What is the company security actually like? Is it in place continuously? Is much more something we're trying to move towards.

Patrick: [00:46:07] What would surprise people about software security, generally speaking? You've talked about the difference between compliance and actual security. Ultimately, you're not the one liable for a company's security. They are. You're a really key piece of the messaging to the marketplace. Just like Moody's not responsible for a default. What should we know about software security? What's the cutting edge here? What does the frontier look like?

Christina: [00:46:27] A lot of what makes it in the headlines are like a nation state is attacking somebody. Most companies, their problem is not a nation state wants to attack them. Most companies, their problem is they can't sell their product. This is like from a security perspective, why you kind of, actually you go in through a wedge of compliance. Again, the problem is not China wants you, the problem is no one wants you, see if you can help this. The other part too is for most companies, they're not doing the basics. Again, sort of twofold. One, there's lots of basics and two there's just lots of stuff going on in a company. It's actually, also in the very early days of Vanta, one of the very first tests we wrote, like checks we started doing was does everybody in the company have two factor on their email? There were about 10 companies we did this for initially, 9 out of 10 of them told us they had two factor on everybody's email account. 2 out of 10 actually did. When you go look at the list, 7 in the middle, oh, it's everyone but the founders. It's everyone but the office manager. They're almost there, but this stuff is just hard and so much is going on. It's so easy to have things slip through the cracks. A lot of security broadly, right, you're only as strong as your weakest link. There is just, even if some of this stuff just sounds dead simple and like kind of trivial, I actually do think there's a ton of value in helping people shore it up.

Patrick: [00:47:42] What do you think just generally about competitive advantage? You started your career at an investing company, so I'm sure you thought about this endlessly. I see a wall of books behind us that people won't be able to see. What are your thoughts on building competitive advantage just writ large?

Christina: [00:47:57] The obvious statement of like, you have to. There'd be a less obvious statement of you have to keep trying things and it is not always what you think will be the competitive advantage that ends up being the competitive advantage. Maybe to try to say it differently, I think it's actually kind of hard often to predict upfront what some of this will be.

And so, you just have to try a few things and you might be surprised by what works, but I think that actually just puts pressure on like iteration speed, more than whiteboard sessions in some way. Trying to be overly academic about this is not... a path to success here.

Again, it's a little too reductive, but it's like it's hackathons, it's just trying things. What are real people actually going to use, which is always hard. Trying to reason about the network effects, which is really hard. I think even 10, 15, 20 years into like large networks to engage users in a network internet, we're still not very good at that. And so it is just hard to whiteboard out.

Patrick: [00:48:59] Why are we not good at that, do you think?

Christina: [00:49:01] I think probably because on an internet scale, it is just so different than real life. And so we don't actually have a lot of practice thinking about it. Some people talk about it. It's also hard to actually reason about what exponential growth is because you don't often see that. But I think similarly, actually the patterns and like the differences of interactions between different users on a service in different ways, or like buyers and sellers, it's just so much going on there. And there's so much complexity. It's really hard to reason about. And yet there's just not real-world analogies at the same scale because at the end of the day just like the giant Monte Carlo simulation and it's just running so much that like everything along the spectrum actually happens. Whereas in real life, the low probability things don't happen very much.

Culture and Business Building
Patrick: [00:49:42] As Vanta has now become a fairly large company, a lot of revenue, a lot of customers, what can you do to make sure the decision, the average quality of decisions being made inside the business stay high? You don't get to make most of them anymore. How do you quality control decision-making?

Christina: [00:49:58] Culture. And one of our values and actually we recently did something of a poll internally. Our most popular value is our most controversial one, which is frameworks thinking, which is basically like have a framework for your decisions and articulate it. And we're actually not prescriptive about which framework you use, but we are prescriptive and that you have one and it's articulated. And I think that mostly just has the effect of making the decision maker stop. And even if they're like, look, I know the answer is you have something on the homepage, it still makes them stop and write down why that is the right answer and that forces them to think through it. And so that I think is actually one of our better tools for that.

Patrick: [00:50:39] I'm forgetting the name of the law, but there's an interesting law for software where the product will sort of map to how information flows through the organization.

Christina: [00:50:47] But like you ship your org chart.

Patrick: [00:50:48] Yeah. You ship your org chart. Do you think about that? Like how do you structure the business and what's worked there?

Christina: [00:50:54] I do think about it because we've done it and it's always very well intentioned. I think actually it speaks to like the power of incentives and the power of structure and actually how much organizational design and incentives can have these totally seemingly disparate downstream effects. So one thing we've done is I think actually the trade off on that is you can just change your organizational design more frequently. And so we've basically every three to six months, the company's history, changed how product is structured, what problems we're tackling. There's definitely a cost to this. You definitely have a bit a thrash, bit of adjustment, but the flip side is you actually are kind of like forcing people to like pivot and think about problems in different ways. And so they don't get kind of too calcified in what they're doing. And so yeah, on that, like everyone is kind of stable going, but going in these very well-defined ways that ended up being exposed to users unexpectedly versus kind of more thrash, we've kind of gone a little bit more on the change things upside.

I think the other place this shows up in organizations is handoffs, which would be like sales to see us through success is one. Some of that is inevitable, but we also have tried to really buddy up sales and CSM so they really like understand each other as people. And so it's less of like, oh, I signed the customer, fling them over. I guess they'll get onboarded and who knows what happens next? And more like, no, if you're a sales person, but you spent as much time with someone and come to customer success and understand how they talk to customers, you're probably subconsciously going to change some of the things you say for the better of the customer.

Patrick: [00:52:29] Are there any other things about being a leader inside of a business that's growing fast that have surprised you? Like hard lessons that you've learned or counterintuitive things that have worked? Like what else has been surprising going from academic to pragmatic?

Christina: [00:52:45] Joking, but not, I someday look forward to the feeling of mastery, but I kind of can't remember what that feels like. Just feeling like you're good at something, truly good at it is not something I experienced for the last few years. I think there's more than I expected. And again, I'm someone who to a fault kind of likes to run up steep hills metaphorically and actually, but whew. Yeah. And I think it's because in a role like this, your job really is to like figure out something well enough such that you think get someone who's infinitely better than you to do it. As soon as I start feeling like not mastery, but sometimes like reasonably competent at something, then you're like, oh, I have to give this away now. I'm going to go back to square one with something else. But I think for me, actually, there is just recognizing that, calling that out. And being like, okay, great. Some day this will change, but mastery is not the game I'm playing right now.

The Future
Patrick: [00:53:36] If you were to put your dreamer hat on a little bit and think about what this could become, it's one of these businesses where you want to think about, if things go right, what could it mean? Dream for us in terms of Vanta's future. Like what might this thing become based on its current trajectory?

Christina: [00:53:51] Yeah. So we think about Vanta being part of every software transaction. One business is buying from another business and it's part of that evaluation. Are you reasonable? I'm going to give you a bunch of data. Are you going to leak it on the internet? Are you going to do the right thing with it? And that's sort of Vanta's MO is we help... It was vendors first, but vendors actually do the right thing, know what they're doing, get secure, and then prove that security or demonstrate it to their buyers. And over time, helping those buyers reason about the security of their software vendors. So we really do see Vanta as part of every transaction.

Patrick: [00:54:25] Connective tissue for lots of things. Very cool. I see that bookshelf again in the back. I used to be such a nut about books and I've sort of stopped just because I find conversations like this to have a lot more information content. What do you do to keep learning? Like, is it still books? What have you found? Has it changed for you? What is your information diet?

Christina: [00:54:44] I still read a lot of them. I actually go in waves. So I kind of won't read a book for a month or two, and then I will over the course of a month, read 10, 12 books. And it's this sort of strange wave pattern where it kind of averages out to, call it, a book a week, but it's much lumpier than that. A big part of reading for me consciously is fiction books. Again, some of it is I've always liked this. This is actually where I just feel very comfortable. It's what I just did as a kid. In terms of other things, I mean, podcasts, just the last decade, and kind of last few years. I've been listening to podcasts for a decade and a half, but really the last few years and the explosion there has been really neat to see the newsletters, conversations, probably more conversation skewed than ever I think also, yeah.

Patrick: [00:55:27] Well, this idea of never getting to do mastery as the leader and sort of having to fire yourself right as you're approaching it. Where are you the novice right now? Like what are the things that you're interested in that you don't yet know a lot about, but you think are important?

Christina: [00:55:39] Okay, so two... I mean, a lot of things top of mind, but two things top of mind. One, structuring relationships with like other folks in our ecosystem. So whether it's audit partners or kind of adjacent vendors. I think coming from VC people think you've probably great at this stuff, but it was only two years. I was like mostly talking to people, right? I wasn't giving out term sheets. So that piece of just like learning how to structure some of those relationships, so both sides are quite happy with them sort of gets at like the discovery of what's actually important to you. And I think the first answer is always revenue, but then you keep going and there's five more interesting answers that you can really build around there. I think honestly like brand marketing and just profile raising. We've been really quiet about Vanta for the last few years. And a lot of it was because we actually thought we had a great business and we didn't. We wanted people to still think we were like off in some days corner and we needed like interventions and drinks about what we were doing with our lives. We do the business. It's quite good, but the times have changed. And so just like, how can we raise the profile of the company in what we're doing, where honestly, a lot of this stuff doesn't come super naturally to me? I am much more of a like, I'll just go sit in the corner and work and emerge when you're done. That's not quite the game on the field. And I think you do have to play the game on the field.

Patrick: [00:56:58] In what way have you gotten most better as a leader of the business?

Christina: [00:57:03] There's probably a like clarity of thought and communication piece of just figuring out how to harness what I have in my head, articulate it in a way that makes sense to people who are not me, and communicate it clearly. I think I've gone between probably like the classic founder, like being way too prescriptive, and then spent some time definitely not quite too hands-off. But just being like, oh, well you're a smart, motivated person. And like, I wouldn't want someone telling me what to do. So you just go, but then realizing like no, some direction is actually really helpful, especially if you want quick decisions, good decisions, et cetera. And so just kind of like trying to find an equilibrium on that continuum.

Patrick: [00:57:45] Is there anything unique about what makes Vanta tick that we haven't talked about yet?

Christina: [00:57:51] I think there's a part... So we still do this. So the early days, we talked about customers on a first name basis, talk about Dan. Here's how Vanta made Dan happy and sad. Everyone knew Dan is a real person. Everyone knew what Dan did was happy and sad. And we talked about it in that way, which is in some ways really juvenile, but it was actually just like emotional and kind of purposely so because it was like, look, we're building software for millions of internet businesses, ideally, but also there's real people behind it and our decisions affect them. And I think while we're past the stage of everyone knows who any given Dan is, there's very much like that ethos, like that is our version of customer centricity, where we are building software that affects real people. And again, it makes them happy and sad. We're going to like do the best to take that kind of responsibility seriously.

Patrick: [00:58:44] If you think about those out there, where you were in 2015 or something like this, sort of in the early stages of figuring out what they might want to do, but going down the entrepreneurial path, everyone always asks an idea or two, like what should they do? I'll ask it differently. Which is like, what shouldn't they do? Like what negative advice would you give to would be founders out there?

Christina: [00:59:04] Listen to the people you want to listen to. Don't listen to the people who seem like they know what they're saying. So a few parts. One, I had a bunch of people tell me I shouldn't leave USV. And in retrospect, like the pinnacle of my career, anyone's career was when they were like 24? Like come on, literally people just... And well intentioned, but they were just like, this is a great job. It's a great springboard. If you think about your email address, the left side, Christina, there's a right side, usv.com. The right side is clearly stronger than the left. Why would you leave it? So well-intentioned and so infuriating. And I think now, especially as you can look back and be like, that was horrendous advice for a few reasons.

But I think one, there was like a bet on myself that I was very willing to take there. And I think that helped, even though I got a little confused, right? With everyone saying that. That was really helpful. And I think on the flip side, I also had people around me who were like, you can go be... Like, why wouldn't you be an engineer? You can go do that. I felt like I was very old at 24 too, kind of like a mid career switch. And they were like no. One, that's not true. And two, like oh, well, you can learn and that will only take two years. It'll be fine. So just go do it. Why wouldn't you do that? And I think that optimistic take was just really helpful. Kind of having these are the people who like believe in you more than you believe in yourself.

Patrick: [01:00:21] I love that. I asked the same closing question of everybody. What is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Christina: [01:00:27] You're so good at this question. I had time to prepare. So it was also like parent things, but I actually think one thing this person probably doesn't even know they did was when I was an undergrad freshman year, I ended up meeting a senior at the time at school who... I'm not quite sure why she did this. And it was Alice. She basically sat me down and was like, "Hey, there's a lot of money at Stanford to like have them send you places for the summer. You just have to know how to apply for it and what to say and how to do that."

And she sat me through and like ran me down, how to apply for student grants, basically. The different ones. And I spent every summer minus the Google summer, somewhere in the world. I had this grant where like I would break even for the summer. And I think the experience that like, I'm going to send myself to Rwanda at 19 and just live alone and it will be cool. And it was fine. Right? But just so much came out of that. And I'm just eternally grateful for her for doing that. And I kind of still to this day don't know why she did that.

Patrick: [01:01:27] Can I ask one follow-up which is... So you mentioned Rwanda, what were the other couple? And so much came out of it, you mentioned like the sort of technology field. What other major things came out of those trips?

Christina: [01:01:38] There was Thailand and Uganda. And Uganda, somewhere as a journalist ostensibly. And that was just like getting comfortable, being able to call people up and ask them questions. And you have to say, hi, I'm Christina. And I'm like kind of a random person, but can I come over and ask you a bunch of questions? And the, being like, totally, go for it. And so some amount of just being able to do that. Rwanda summer, I was with a Rwandan NGO that didn't do any work in Rwanda because of the political climate and stuff in neighboring countries. But because as a young Western academic, also a 19 year old, I could go ask questions about Rwandan stuff. And so that summer, actually the government decided to let a bunch of the prisoners who had been in jail for a decade from the genocide walk home to go for these local courts.

And it was like the big thing of that summer. Right? But no Rwandan could really ask those questions and I could walk in and be like, hi, I'm doing like a school project. Can I ask them stuff? And they would basically feed me questions to go ask, my colleagues would because a lot going on there and there's a lot that's like deeply unfair and deeply messed up in that. But I think for me, that was actually realizing, this is like, again, really messed up and really unfair. And I should not be able to do this for lots of reasons, but how can I sort of harness all of this for the benefit of my colleagues who clearly should actually be the ones doing this. And so, I think just a lot of stuff around figuring out how to maneuver around the system you're in.

Patrick: [01:02:58] I love the story you've told us today because so much of it as a willingness to put yourself in new situations and learn very quickly and keep going. I've loved getting to know you and the company. It has been really fun today. Thank you so much for the time.

Christina: [01:03:11] Thank you.



Created by @mercedeschien

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
