
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released May 2nd, 2022
Invest Like the Best
Eric Glyman - Reimagining Corporate Finance
Eric Glyman is the co-founder and CEO of Ramp. We cover Ramp’s initial marketing wedge, how the business has dealt with such fast growth, and why they hold stablecoins on their balance sheet.

00:00:00
01:01:22
Introduction
[00:02:13] Patrick: My guest today is Eric Glyman, co-founder and CEO of Ramp. Ramp is best known for its corporate cards, but it has a range of software products to help finance teams save time and money. The business has grown rapidly since its founding in 2019 and was last valued at $8 billion. Eric and I discussed Ramp's initial marketing wedge, how the business has dealt with such fast growth, and why they hold Stablecoins on their balance sheet. Please enjoy my conversation with Eric Glyman.

The Inspiration Behind Ramp
[00:02:41] Patrick: Eric, I'd love to begin our conversation by hearing what this industry that you're building in was like when you first approached it. What were the things, looking back on the early days, that were most notably awry about the existing incumbent solutions that motivated you to want to build a company here in the first place?

[00:03:00] Eric: Happy to go into it right away. I mean, so Ramp is a relatively young company and it's stark how quickly things have changed. We incorporated in March of 2019, and I think the theme of not just the year, the day, the decade, frankly, was one of excess. The way to compete in the credit card industry, which is our first flagship product, was buy our card. We've got amazing signup bonuses. We might have great lounges for you too. We've got points and rewards. We understand you uniquely. It was very marketing forward. It was very centered around EO excess, metal cards, black cards, all these kind of things. It was very much the idea of what credit cards could be and what they represented. What was strange to me about this was first, I had a funny purview to it. I started the company with a focus on savings. It was bought by Capital One. So my job was to ask people what they were looking for. Turned out, it wasn't points, it wasn't cash back. It was more on their bank account. Next, when we started talking with finance teams, they weren't looking for points or sign up bonuses.

These were marginal differences. It didn't fundamentally change the outcomes of businesses. They were looking for more control. They were looking to be more profitable. They were looking to go home earlier. So it felt there was a large and fundamental misalignment, where the large scale credit card issuers were thinking a lot about how to get people to spend more money, earn more points, show off the brand, whereas most business owners, people operating companies, were more simple, straightforward, and actually wanted to be more successful to do what they actually cared about. It felt like business owners, the customers, wanted something different than what the core partners wanted. I would say it started with the fundamental misalignment that got us very curious and obsessed with, what eventually led into Ramp, is focused on helping business owners spend less money, spend less time.

[00:04:43] Patrick: Maybe you could describe and summarize, we've done it elsewhere with a breakdown of Visa that I encourage people to listen to, but maybe you could describe the core business model behind that black card, behind that Chase Sapphire model, and then contrast that against Ramp's conceptualization of its first model of offering a card to businesses. I would just love to understand the business model wedge. People know how a credit card works. We'll get into some of the details. But would love, yeah, you to describe what you saw in a business model and what you hoped to design early on the Ramp side.

[00:05:14] Eric: Definitely. Every time a card is swiped, a series of transactions go off extremely quickly. First on the merchant side, there's a request, let's say for $100. Approve or deny, thumbs up, thumbs down. Sent through the merchant acquirer card network down to the issuer processor, and eventually issuer. And within six seconds, the issuer has to say, yes, this is good or not. It's good to go. They get the clearing back. Effectively, the merchant, so long as they meet core conditions, is credited for this. They're credited not for the full 100, but for a portion, and what's taken out of that is effectively interchange, as well as network fees. Depending on the type of card used, that can vary anywhere from debit, call it 30 cents, to corporate or high end premium consumer cards could be fees of up to call it 3%. A small portion of that merchant processor and the merchant bank, some portion will go to the network, but the lion's share of that will go to the funding party, which is the issuer. So those would be your credit card in your wallet specifically taking that.

The historical reason is they're taking the risk. Effectively the funds have cleared. If there's a problem with the payer who sent the funds, it's on the issuer that they have to hold through to this transaction. If there's credit involved, which is really the dominant product, most cards high end like that, they're taking the underwriting risk involved, and for that, they're able to keep the majority. So this can vary, call it, from two, two and a half, 2.6%. From there, you have a set of fees. You might have the cost of financing that. Maybe you're borrowing, maybe you're using deposit, but there's some amount for every rolling period. You're fronting that. There's credit losses, fraud losses. You're having to account for that. And there's also rewards and rebates, which for most of the industry has become this number one big thing, of the biggest cost of doing business was actually rebating it back to the customer. For the past 30 years, you really couldn't enter this industry unless you were a dominant player, FDIC insured bank. Not a whole lot of innovation, but great marketing organization. So it started this race to who's going to give away, make people think the points are worth more and in the background trying to devalue this. So there was a fundamental game going on, where both consumers and credit cards were trying to outsmart each other.

One of the things that we felt was, back to that original premise, people aren't looking for more cash back or points. They're looking for more in their bank account. When you follow that through, you realize that 1% back, 2% back, whatever it could be, sounds great, but not spending that dollar in that first place for the end consumer is 50 to 100 times as powerful. And there's just a lot of ways. People do spend things on subscriptions they're no longer using on services that they could get for less, whatever it may be. So one of the fundamental premises of Ramp was could you identify that? And if so, you might actually have a better claim to make a product that an end customer, a business owner, consumer want to use, because it's much more powerful for them. You go from a startup company with literally 0.000% of the market share to suddenly being able to take things on and do that. So first it was around savings. It fell further into monetary savings was great, but saving time for business owners, even better. If you could replace software that wasn't so useful to do that. So could you actually use interchange, not just as a means of divvying up rewards, but as a fundamental pool to go and create great software that creates a flywheel of value for your end customer. So the premise was let's make things. If you can make things that people actually want to use, that people want to pull out, use their card more than others in their wallet, that'll create more volume, that'll improve the economics that you keep on the funds flow.

[00:08:39] Patrick: In the early days, I'm always really curious what you attribute the success to with new customers that are trying Ramp, which is not an established brand. You said before we hit record the founders of most of your competitors wore top hats. These are old, old companies, and this is a brand new one. So how did you win early on? What was it that caused those early wins? Because Ramp's founded in 2019. I think it's one of the fastest growing companies by market value ever in the many billions of market value today in 2022. So what do you attribute that early success to?

[00:09:09] Eric: For me, building with and having real relationships with people building businesses, actually listening to them. From the get go, before we shipped a single card or a single product, we talked with a hundred finance teams and founders. And rather than going and saying, "Would you buy our product we're coming out with," we said, "We're trying to build a product that's focused on helping your business spend less money, spend less time. Can we get your advice?" And it shifted the relationship from being on opposite sides of the table, so to speak, of I'm trying to get something from you, would you buy it, to let's sit on the same side of the table together and problem solve and talk about what real issues you have in your business. We started to learn things. We thought it was all about saving money. It turned out that actually for many finance teams, the problem was not, can I get a card. It was, I've got cards. I have seven. People don't turn in the receipts on time. I'm paying for things that are more expensive than what friends at other companies are getting charged. I feel like I'm getting ripped off. I could be running a lot more efficiently and my partner is trying to get me to spend more and outsmart me. So there's not many people on this side. So even that relationship of we're here to build and align our business with you and the sincerity of I'm here, we've got a team with almost entirely engineers at the time, and we want to build together with you was very different and refreshing than what most finance teams and the like were used to.

And a card is a somewhat different, even from business model than traditional SaaS. It's not, here's a contract which you buy, and if you have seats, you go with it. It's invisible. It almost pays you. Our monetization effectively grows with people's growing trust in the business. So the whole premise was how do we grow trust with you, build with you. That was the initial wedge in and why we were able to grow. It turned out that a lot of people who went were building great businesses. This wasn't a product where there was low awareness. People had heard of credit cards. In fact, they wanted to stop hearing about it because they had other problems to solve in their business. But when you make a decision, they would call up other finance teams, founders, people in their network, and for the first time people were hearing actually this product is different. It's aligned with us, it's saving us money. It's replacing other sets of softwares. You should use it. So that was the initial jump. And then the pandemic was a huge accelerator for us. That just went from, the premise of savings went from interesting to fundamentally important. If you didn't know what happened to the financing markets and having to deal with remote made our digital product first important.

Breaking Down the Invisible Business
[00:11:29] Patrick: I really like this concept of almost the invisible business, where if you're successful because they're using your software, which presumably you're not charging for some or all of it, it just comes with use of the cards, no one has to make a big buying decision. You'd start at zero and ramp, sorry for the pun, it could ramp very quickly and aggressively. Describe that software in the early days. If really what you're selling is an easier life made possible by easier software and then you're making money on something that they're used to, but it's invisible, what was that early software and what was co-building like? I love when especially enterprise companies do this, but the actual literal tactics of how you do it is very interesting to me. What kinds of questions were you asking? How often would you show them an iteration of the thing before it was shipped? The details of this co-building are really interesting to me down to the most granular, if you can share them.

[00:12:19] Eric: Happy to. Let's follow that premise through. We're building this together. We're trying to seek advice for people, and people would give you advice and that it was excellent. We were seeing common themes in a lot of the art was we went back to this Henry Ford ism of you want to build a car, not a faster horse. Trying to really understand what's the problem, what's the job to be done, and how do you build products that ultimately align to solving that end problem. Not necessarily solving it in the way or in what people are asking for because often they were going to the familiar. The first product that we came out with was this corporate card designed to help you spend less was the moniker. If you look through it, it actually was a set of products, streamlined all around helping people close their books faster, going from card, which would trigger IRS requirements if you spent over $75 to collect receipts, to label that, getting it into accounting software and the like, and then trying to give insights around ways that you might spend less. That was the first product. The way that it was built, I'll give you a couple of examples. So one of our early customers was a direct to consumer business called Candid. I think Nick Greenfield has been on one of your early episodes. They were scaling incredibly rapidly at that time. Went from, I think, 10 people to 250 in the time period of, I want to say a year and a half, two years, and there was a lot of chaotic-ness. Like anything, when you're hiring new product teams and engineering teams, new design teams, they would have problems like they were spending on lots of project management software. They were spending on lots of new design software and suites. Our statement to them was, "We want to save the time and money. Are there areas that you know are wasting time for you guys or money?" Some areas they knew, others they didn't.

On the second part, we wanted to save you money and we said, "Okay. Would you send us your past 90 days of transactions? We'll go through and see what we can do." And at the time, it was very much done by hand. We were trying to figure out based off of the credit card descriptors, we see it was super not clean. Could we build some scripts to help clean that up? So things like TRL Star 1011, we could see, okay, that was Trello. SMRT's Star, the invoice number, that was Smartsheets. So on and so forth. And we started to see patterns emerging. If you actually understood what the merchants were, you clustered them, it turned out for them, they were paying for, I think in order of five sets of software that did the same thing in project management. They were paying for some vendors where they were grandfathered into an old annual plan and the new plans were actually materially less. We came back to them early on. Not just, "Hey, if you use this card, we'll give you these insights on an ongoing basis. We found a quarter million dollars in savings. Let's talk through it." And it went from, "Okay, this is a vendor trying to sell me some product to use," to, "They just spent time going through our data, showing us how to spend less. We'd be happy to switch cards. Send over." And it was lots of moments like that. It was both putting in the elbow grease and the manual work to figure out what were the patterns. What could you automate through software to take what was a rote manual process and have that done through code? To next, starting to build patterns within the software that would say things. So, that was money.

Other ones were focused on time. The most painful experiences for anybody who's worked, it's this weird relationship on getting receipts in. It fundamentally doesn't make sense. Tend to believe that if the credit card issuers actually just collected receipts, did it concur an expense if I shouldn't exist. You could actually pull a lot of data from the merchants and get it into your books. It's a bizarre thing that's there in the first place. And because they didn't, there's all these bad design decisions that follow from it. If you want to get a transaction from Amex to concur, it takes 24 hours. It means that if you're an employee and you're at dinner, you're not going to take a photo and wait the next day. You usually put it in your wallet and forget. The average receipt is charging a month later. So we're hearing this all the time from finance teams. We said, "Okay. Well, the problem is you can't close your books. You have to restate things constantly or answer to your bad hygiene. Let's just do this. We're in the authorization layer. Let's text a card holder, when they have a receipt in their hand. Let's build some OCR to be able to match it to the right transaction. And from then to today, the average receipt is turning within 30 minutes on Ramp. The question was not, again, how do we design something that'll get people to use a card that was one of the byproducts, it started with, what's costing business money they shouldn't be spending? What's costing them time? And then, how do we either manually, or through the software process line and experience, help them achieve these goals? And then that became the product.

[00:16:32] Patrick: If you look at the website today across the four categories, start scale, streamline, and save, it's more than a dozen individual things. I don't know how many of those live in the same screens of software or something, but there's a lot going on in terms of the functions or the jobs that you're doing for your partners. And again, the business is less than three years old. So talk me through how you've gone about building the company itself and the team fast enough to be able to do that many different things well? Because typically, this story in this world would be, you might build the initial product for three years and not even launch it to make it really tailored to the customer. Seems like you've built much faster and in more directions. And so I'm really curious, what made that possible?

[00:17:14] Eric: Yeah. That was an explicit design decision around, fundamentally, what the company needed to be. And some of this came from, we'd sold our last company to Capital One and saw, what were they extraordinary at, but what were they not great at? Spent a lot of time with American Express, with our prior company. Got to know Chase in a lot of ways. And our view is, they had fundamental things they were excellent at, whether it was extraordinary brand, extraordinary credit writing ability, extraordinary distribution, but they were incredibly slow. Form Factor Ricard has hardly changed in 30 years. Compliance functions that were set up for real and important, I think, regulatory review purposes were extended to become, effectively, a bat that made development take three months, for even changing a webpage, or the color of a button, because of real and mostly perceived plausible risk. And so a lot of the question was, how could we design parts of our own organization that dealt with regulatory, potential legal, or even financial services, that could not, and could never go down, to be extremely methodical and deliberate? But for most of the rest of the webpage generations, of software services on the top that involve the movement of money directly, how do you make that go really fast? How do you actually deliver what we hope that the first kind of really engineering and product-driven organization in the credit card space? And so that was a lot of the initial premise.

And to do that, we put our money where our mouth was. The first 10 people, seven were engineers. One was on design team from IDO. One was on talent. It was people who could build things of structure, who endeavored to try to find extraordinary talent. And even from the first pool, we worked really hard to find really outlier levels of talent. Whether it's some of the team from Paribas [inaudible], to folks like Calvin Lee. Calvin was top of his class, MIT, finished in two-and-a-half years. Google Brain, Facebook AI research, came to work on our team. Veeral Patel, Veeral’s extraordinary. Was going to WWDC from the time he was 14, building apps. Pablo, who built out the engineering office for Lyft in New York and the like. And so we tried to have a team that was extraordinary in capabilities from the get go, that would attract other people who wanted to work with other great people, wanted to build and credit processes that for areas of engineering, we needed to go super fast. We would do this and operate and ship consistently. And parts of the infrastructure that needed to go slow, have very low latency, could never be taken down, do that, but isolate them and have separate processes around and make sure the engine around talent was really a forefront focus of the company.

Recruiting, Marketing and Leadership at Ramp
[00:19:45] Patrick: I think about recruiting as being about pitching who you're going to work with, what you're going to work on, how much cash you're going to make, how much equity and therefore potential upside are you going to garner? How would you say Ramp approaches those four things in balance? Are there some that you emphasize more than others? Why were you able to get those people to all say yes?

[00:20:06] Eric: Just trying to understand what was important to them. Everyone has dreams, aspirations, things they want to do. Some want to work on and build great companies, be a part of great organizations, to having a strong talent density is just, why do so many people go to McKinsey? Why do so many people go to Goldman? Because other good people are there. And so trying to explicitly have a interesting mix of people and this talent density was important as a goal in and of itself. Next was ownership, especially for people going on and taking that much risk, they either want to work really hard and be able to sit on the upside. And so compared to others, we allocated a lot, not only to the pool, but even actually delayed the founding of the company, put debt on it originally, so people, the first time effectively, could buy founder shares. And be thinking not just about ownership, but also tax optimization, things you could do for people early at the company. And so thinking about the long term from their perspective, what could be great.

Next giving of a lot of responsibility and then having no illusion about the long term. It's possible that we'll all work together for 20-plus years building this company. That'd be great. But it's possible some want to go there, see what it's like, and go and start their company later. And when I look at some of the first 22 have gone on to do that, and we've been there to support them. And so I think a lot of this is around having like a real exciting mission that feels worth pursuing. Credibility, not just in what you're doing, but that you actually ask, or are listening to what's important to them in their own life and career, following through on that, and as it changes, not just having a relationship building the company, but helping them actualize what they care about and believe in over the course of their life.

[00:21:38] Patrick: How do you think about the biggest mistake that you've made far in Ramp and the lessons that it taught you that might be portable to other entrepreneurs out there?

[00:21:48] Eric: Generally, the moments when we found ourselves in the most trouble is when we knew there were problems along the way, or there was something fundamentally broken, we were getting signals, we didn't act on it quickly enough. I think that this can happen sometimes in, whether it's talent, is probably one that can be broadly related in building a company, stumbling for the real revenue 65 times over year-over-year in 2020, seven-and-a-half and 2021. At that scale, people who were really proficient in great getting 10% better, 5% better every month, mathematically, we're not scaling. Keeping people in roles or actually expecting that people who were ahead of to be able to take things on at larger and large scale, either resulted in teams having to work around in getting, effectively, parts of the organization to crash on each other, or extreme stress on people who probably would have been happier and better off. We just said, "Look, you're great, but being able to work with someone who's seen, it done it, you're going to get further in your career." And so not addressing those. And then similarly, in some customer conversations, we have some extraordinary relationship, whether it's from potato farms, companies sending things quite literally into space, multi-thousand card holder deployments at single companies, publicly stage, private, you name it.

But for some of our larger customers, where we’re in this enterprise relationship, I come from a consumer background, where it's generally simple. We want to have a product, let's do this. I think in some enterprise relationships, it's really complex. It's buying trust, it's whatever. And so I can think of one without giving the specifics, one relationship where we were in a pilot with a large-scale public company for a year-and-a-half. And there was a never-ending list of asks of different things that people wanted. I think on both sides, there was mutual trust loss, because you couldn't get actually what people were looking for. They were making asks. The team working on, was getting exhausted from, "This is the fourth RFP. You've asked us for 40 sets of things." You're tired of it. And then rather than working through the problem, people gave up. I generally think that the failure modes are when people work around each other and don't actually address something here is broken. Do we want to take this forward or not? We're adults. As a company, how do we actually get to the heart of the problem? I think both of those stemmed from avoidance, or not actually facing what is a fundamental breakdown in a problem. And typically, that's where the most problems and bad things have happened for us.

[00:24:04] Patrick: What have you learned most about marketing? Obviously, you've been an entrepreneur before Ramp, so I guess this could be a holistic question. But at Ramp specifically, what lessons in marketing has the business taught you?

[00:24:16] Eric: It's evolved pretty heavily over time. The first one is that you need to test things and actually show it to people. So this is not like go out and do studies, and try to go and get people's reaction. In many ways, Ramp is a large-scaled relationship business. We have over a 100,000 cardholders, but these are 5,000 businesses. And if you want to, you can talk with a ton of them every month, week, whatever. And if you're putting ads out, not only do your existing customers see it, but others. And I think one of the best things that you can do is, as you're going and creating, actually show it to people and say, "You've got three different versions. What do you think about this? What do you see?" Because you can actually start to go and get real insights and perspectives about what you're doing. So that's one, a real earnest showing it to people, you can generally arrive much better. And your best ads are never the first, it's usually the 10th or 15th, and you need to cycle to get real honest reactions. Not just hear what people say, but also like look at their eyes, look at their face. Are they smiling? These subtle things. You only get one first impression, but you want to see those first impressions on people, is one.

The next, I think that there's a tendency, certainly I had it, but I think a lot of founders have it, to focus heavily on product. And tell you about all the features and things that you can do rationally. And organizations are bizarre ecosystems. The map of what people are looking for is, unfortunately, not always rational. And your model of rationality isn't necessarily even the reality of it. And so thinking less about marketing the product and the futures, and getting more into how do you create desire? What are people looking for? How do you tap into that? And think of it less of about informing, showing what a product could look like, what are the features, where the ROI? But what are the things that meet people want to do things like gets stuck in their head, they can't stop thinking about it? These concepts that just stick with people. And so, I think that those are the key things, for me, that this is a significantly larger dollar scale than the last company we had. And I think that if you can do these few things, you can go a pretty long way.

[00:26:11] Patrick: It reminds me of my friend Jeremiah's note that, for any company, you should understand what they make versus what they sell. And the gap between those two things is often the story of their margins. Which is really, really interesting. Basically saying the same thing. What have you learned about managing a senior team? I'm curious how many people report to you. But more generally, in something growing this quickly, you must be very good at delegation, by definition. But how have you done that well? What advice would you offer others trying to manage growth of this speed? Sixty-five-x in a year sounds great from the outside, but I know, having seen it from the inside of companies, that it's hell on earth in certain ways. Growth is very hard. So what have you done there to improve the way you've manage people on the senior team?

[00:26:53] Eric: Some of it is like a framework shifts. I feel like people's first company it's, "Don't go out of business. Be terrified to let a dollar go." It's often a scarcity mindset. I think people say is talk about this abundance mindset. But for me, what really internalized it was, there was a day when I was quite literally 33% of the headcount. Today. I'm 0.3%. I'm just quite, literally not as helpful and not as impactful as what I used to be. And I think that the larger that companies get, I think that the more the role of a founder and people managing shifts to one, really clarifying, where are we trying to go? And what is the vision? And so making clear, what is that we're trying to solve for? Can you go down to the nth degree of more concreteness? And so people can say, "I understand it. Nothing is left to ambiguity. Let me go and propose different ways and paths that I can get there." I think part of my job is clarifying that vision. Some of the quantitative goals, some of the versions of how, and so people can start to trade up and you can actually create alignment among larger organizations.

And the second, one of my favorite business thinkers ever, were coaches. So whether it's like John Wooden, UCLA, Bill Walsh, “The Score Takes Care of Itself”, I think a lot of my job is not to do. There are moments where I'll have to go into the org and break things apart and even just work on things together. It's much more about helping people live up to their potential. If you're trying to hire extraordinary people, there's a reason in leadership roles, they're capable of great things. And I think a lot of the question, generally, failure mode happens for me when I try to go and solve what is the functional problem versus what makes this person great and how do I put them in scenarios that tap into their strengths. Help them see some of their blind spots and allow them to do the things that make them great. And so I think a lot of my management style comes back to trying to remember what are the strengths, go over that, identify what are the gaps, and say, "This is people. You're spending a lot of time. How do we find someone to compliment you? Should this be your responsibility? Or do we want to give this away?" And generally, when you do that, things start moving a lot better.

What Ramp Does Differently
[00:28:49] Patrick: Do you think that Ramp has done anything out of the ordinary? We're talking about on the financing side? You already mentioned the notion of delaying the founding of the company, which is more on the employee side, which is super interesting, I hadn't heard that before. But when it comes to investors, you've got a great cap table, many of whom are familiar to our audience. What have you done that's unique or differentiated here? Or do you think you've just really tried to run a best in class cap table process every time?

[00:29:17] Eric: There's definitely some things that are unusual, both on the cap table and assembly of capital, as well as also some of the use of it. I think we're one of the largest companies that holds a material portion of stable coin in our balance sheet. And so there's some interesting things on both portions. But we've never actually made a fundraising pitch deck. Whether it was a seed, to even the most to recent rounds, we've never gone out to race. Typically, in the same way we went to customers and said, we never said, "Would you like to buy this product?" We would say, "Could we get your advice on this?" We would meet with investors, say, "We're working on this. How do you think about this?" We would show progress and get their advice. And so we transformed the relationship from the get-go. They're not trying to go and raise funds from you. Even though, who knows, maybe they could entertain that, too. They're trying to solve a problem. And you're an expert in the business or in the industry, you see things, how can we go and solve these problems together? And they created almost a pool instead of people to pitch, but people that, potentially, you could fill it out and see if you would want to work together on some problems. Whether it's closing customers, think your business challenge, hiring people. When you saw things were working, both parties wanted to work with each other. So a different kind of design premise.

Next, I think that a lot of founders think in terms of, you need to go out, run a process, whoever has the highest price, go do that. And I think that people optimize locally of the highest price and least solution surely must be the thing. Argues that is wrong optimization. It's about maximizing long-term total enterprise value. And doing that is much more about assembling a world class of investors who want to be there, not just now, but over the course of many, many years. People who trust you throughout the industry and want to build together with you. And the way to do that is not by trying to stretch and squeeze every last dollar and save every last share, but trying to foster love and trust. And so we'd meet with a lot of people, build relationships. And then when it came time to do rounds, generally, it might be someone was thinking about it. We'd say, "Look, we appreciate it." I'm not going to, obviously, shop or share, but for folks who say something is happening, we'd like to think about it, or set some ranges, people would come together, we would never pick the highest price. And that was for a reason. First we'd never pick the highest price, but we would try to figure out how do we get a collective of people working together, find people with unique skill sets that we can go into, whether it's for advice around certain components of our business. Once we had done that, we would say, "Okay, well, sounds like people wanted to buy, call it, 20%, 15% if the business. We would like to do it a lower price. But we would also like to sell less to the company." And so our rounds in the past are very different than the typical 20% round, or it's 15%, there's one lead than everyone's else. It's often much more of a collective pattern. And there's a few other things that we experienced that happened with that. First, because you're not taking the highest price for employees.

It's much more of a, "Okay, wait a minute." Meaning like the four MNA is lower again. So actually for employees, there's a long-term benefit, but a feeling of there's excess value on the table. I can have some comfort in this. For investors, maybe it was a lower amount, but you want to talk about it. You invested in this thing, it was a hot round you bought in and actually the true value is probably above it, which demonstrates your ability to get into great investments. The more people talk about it, the more people hear about it. If you way over perform, your course can always raise. If things don't go perfectly to plan you have some operating room in leverage and it starts to create, I think what it adds up to is the sense of inevitability. I think, at least in the entrepreneur world, Elon Musk was sort of famous for doing this with SpaceX, where they would never take the highest price, kind of slowly build this up over time and you knew if you were buying SpaceX stock, it was going to be a great investment. So in many ways it was modeled after that philosophy of how do we go and bring the right people together, view this as a team effort, not as an adversarial relationship and just try to build a great long term company we're here to do.

[00:32:52] Patrick: You pique my interest with the stable coin thing too, in terms of use or storage of funds in this case. Why are you doing that? How much of the balance sheet is in stable coin? What's the benefit to ramp up thinking about that?

[00:33:02] Eric: It's twofold. I mean, single digit percentage, that can say more, but it is substantial. It's meaningful eight figures funds that are in it. There's very interesting characteristics now. If you actually think about it from a treasurer perspective, your alternatives are earn one to two basis points your bank, which is fine. Could do that. I think the predominant use of that is there it should be defensive. What's interesting about this is you can use a small portion in securities that function almost like a covered bond where it's asset backed and one for one with dollars collateralize and audited too by professional auditors. But yet the yield on it can be high single digit percentage points varying month to month, but can go anywhere from 5%-9% was their highest one month yield. Effectively you can buy this in one month rolls.

If you do this with, call it a small portion of your balance sheet, you can make with the next 95% plus we do in terms of yield. So one, it seemed interesting from a defensive ability to start to go and get yield and get a little bit more. This, we only did later once we had hundreds of millions on the balance sheet. But second, we serve fast growing businesses and daring businesses across different industries and the amount of growth in the crypto currency industry has been really substantial. So what better way to have credibility in it than to actually be a real market participant? First it's financial, but the second as you start to think about what are the problems that you run into in being a crypto currency related business. So today beyond it being useful from a balance sheet perspective, some of the fastest and growing and largest cryptocurrency companies use Ramp. Today, we don't offer any cryptocurrency related services for product, but it's a realness of saying it's sort of walking the walk. It's like, I understand your business, we're holding part of it, we're exploring and thinking about it and it creates its own opportunities.

[00:34:45] Patrick: I often like thinking about the progression of a business, not as kind of marching forward from here, but continuing to work backward from some sort of idealized end state.

[00:34:53] Eric: Love that.

[00:34:53] Patrick: What do you think that story is for Ramp? What is the beautiful, incredibly frictionless amazing experience at the end of the rainbow that doesn't exist yet?

[00:35:06] Eric: I think about it almost as what if your card, your bill payments, your software it was quite literally so smart that if you were spending through the software, a dollar elsewhere counted for a dollar five? What used to take days, hours could be totally automated away. So first you have more financial leverage on every dollar that comes through, you have time back. You can quite literally be more profitable or have your team working on strategic work. Then last, starting to really use data to benefit, not just the single one to one relationship with which cards built historically have done, but you start to get the benefit and wisdom of the crowd. Just as Waze, in many ways, revolutionized the navigation and traffic. It wasn't about having a map and knowing where things were, the most interesting data was other cars in the network, where were they stuck in traffic and how could you use it to help the system be more efficient?

We think about that for our customers. Could you go and see what the highest performing finance teams, how do they run their companies spend on things, close their books quickly? How do you bring those insights to the thousands, tens of thousands of other companies use that and collectively make them all more successful? So I think it comes from focus and general alignment of we want to help your business be more successful, spend less money, spend less time, have frictionless and automated processes, and then using data to actually help you to be there. So some of the manifestations of that have started to become clear. It's fully automated expense management, where 6% of our companies that enable all of our integrations with Gmail, Amazon for business, Lyft and 90% of all their receipts are fully automated, no human touch at all.

It allows employees to be really productive. They don't need spend time reporting, receive, snapping photos of stuff. They can just go back to their work. So that simple versions too. You could imagine extensions where you're buying a set of software and suddenly you see their sales team got you and you're about to pay far above market. But Ramp could help to just running through ongoing procurement processes through travel entertainment processes, where when people are buying hotels, could your car be smart enough, could your bill payment software be smart enough to deliver not just a movement of funds to where you want to go, but to make sure that your dollars and your hours actually go further? So that's the type of teacher, I know it's probably more in spirit than in, you can clearly hear what that looks and feels like. But those are the things that get us really excited and, and folks, we have so long to go to get there.

Peering into the Global Economy and Private Markets
[00:37:22] Patrick: You're lucky to be able to see tons of the finance activity at, you said more than 5,000 different client customer companies now. What is all that information telling you about the world and the economy? It's obviously been a tumultuous period here for the last six months, let's call it. A bit longer than that in some areas. What insight can you share with us on how businesses are thinking about their own challenges or just any trends or data that you've seen as a result of your unique perch?

[00:37:49] Eric: What I can say that's been very clear has been kind of a sudden return and rapid growth of travel and entertainment spend. Where it's not the way that it used to be where people are booking all the time to go see clients, and it's from one kind of central node, but heavy degree of companies are having constant offsites. They're moving so we see it in the Lyft of travel, to hotel spend, of Ubers and things like that, but it's much more distributed. It's moving instead of from tier one to tier one, city to tier two to different kind of destination. And even the relationships that people have within companies are much more, not just even hub and spoke, but just often just spoke. Companies moving from different centers across the country, traveling more often and more frequent kind of hybrid offsites. So that's been one.

So a far cry from what it used to be, but the travel patterns are differing quite a bit. And that's, I think because financial products have been improved, the efficiency is possible for people to get short term, long term. We're seeing more elements of efficient balancing of capital. Your solution is not no funds raised or $2 million term loan, but you'll see companies starting to go and put things on card or flex payments on, call it, 30 days, 60 day products and more efficiently map eCommerce inflows and sales versus your inventory timeline of getting things shipped. So I think just a lot more capabilities, even for small companies to engage in financial engineering, whether it's through products like Ramp or others. So just different movement patterns, as well as to more efficient capital matching and ability to, maybe this is just Amazon's philosophy of being cash flow efficient wearing off on the rest of the world, but thinking not just an income statement, but in matching cash flows over the course of a company's life are the two things that we're seeing just happening more at small and midsize businesses that I frankly don't think happened or they weren't empowered to do in years before.

[00:39:35] Patrick: You mentioned SpaceX earlier as an interesting example of innovation in sort of how they deal with the private markets. I'm curious how you think, another thing they're known for is running this very clean internal process for getting liquidity for people that own equity that are employees or whatever over time to finance their life just like anybody else would, how have you thought about that for yourself or your teammates with a market value that's grown so quickly in a very different business, like you said, than when it was three people, a real thing that's going to be around? How do you think about providing secondary liquidity to employees? Because it seems like the philosophy of that is going to matter for a lot of these companies that are staying private for longer, potentially keeping their options open for longer. What has been your strategy? How do you think about it?

[00:40:20] Eric: It's all now starting to get quite relevant. I'd say it's very top of mind. I don't think that we're fully settled in the view of what this looks like. I think that principles basis, first it's important. I think that people are obviously here to create value over the long term. Sometimes for people being able to take a little bit off the table so you can really focus full stop over many, many years matters to people. I think as a premise, especially for companies that are getting over, have vested stock, been with a company for a period of time, it's time to do that, is one. So I think viewing just talent as a key input, making sure that people in their life continue to be really happy is important. So that's one. The next there's a lot that goes into just the design of this premise, whether it's in private placement or tender offers, there's different time duration of tender has to take place over three months plus, it has to be broadly marketed, be attributed to be balancing kind of supply and demand. There's some platforms to do this. But there's a lot of different rule and design decisions with it. SpaceX was I think a good one, but on another one as well I understand that Airbnb was another example that said, if you're at the company, you can't sell secondary and it created this negative incentive for people to say, if you needed liquidity, leave, leave to go sell it.

There's been a very kind of growing up in the industry of, okay, you need think about how you can give liquidity to people who are there, keep long term alignment incentives. Often that comes in the form of, can't sell more than X percentage of your stock of long term vested, or no more than Y percent per year. Trying to do that and then run regular processes. I think a lot of people today talk about how Anduril does this. Where I think they call it on the order every half a year just about. So long as there's sufficient interest, people can go and say what they're thinking about. That's been such a hard stock for investors to buy that there's generally requisite interest that effectively there's matching processes to go on through. So I think it's going to evolve a lot over the coming years.I think the other trend as well has been loans that people can take against it, sort of going from only Silicon Valley Bank, First Republic to even companies being built specifically to provide this. So we're fascinated by it. I wish I could give you a conclusive of, "Here's what we've settled on." But you can't run around it. And I also think too, if you're sort of asking what are people's desires in the same way, people's biggest impact, they'll take care of their families. You need to be a party to that. And actually I do think it's an obligation of management teams to get to. I think it tends to happen in probably the third to sixth year, depending on the stage of the company and I think we've fallen into it. So in the coming months, let's talk about it.

Past Challenges, Future Goals
[00:42:50] Patrick: It's a fascinating one. It raises the question for me of, if there are other areas of this company building art and process that you think just should be much easier for the founding leadership team? Are there aspects of building a company still that you find just crazy unnecessarily hard or look back on and it's like, "I can't believe that was so difficult?"

[00:43:10] Eric: I think one of the fundamental premises of business is like, you cannot be good at that many things at once. Even the greatest company in the world can pick a couple of things that they are extraordinary at, the rest maybe are halfway decent and hopefully not too many terrible. But if your plan is to be excellent at everything, it's a fundamentally crazy plan. In the same way, it is a little bit nuts that for most companies it's like, whether you're a deep tech company working on self-driving fundamentals and machine learning data sets to a delivery company to a farm and one of the core first challenges you to figure out in your credit card software, your management software, your accounting software, your HR software, all these different sets of suites are kind of manual processes. So I think that this trend of the standardization of if you use the stack to be more successful it's a good thing and we like to be a part of that.

I would say that for me generally the things that I've hated come in these sort of sets of TDM. So we've been better, I think, on the financial side of automating away some of these sorts of different challenges. But one that I think is very interesting, and now we're seeing it with larger brand sales stack. There's even basic things like if you want to manage the inputs, it's very hard. So while it's great that there's CRMs like Salesforce. I think all the rests of the things of how busy are your calendars? What's the productivity? The calculations around specific people? If you actually dig into how I would say for me this is top of mind, sales ops, revenue operations. It's very bespoke I think in a lot of companies right now and a little bit chaotic. So that's a space that I think is important, particularly in the concept of companies can grow faster than ever. They're still in my mind as not correct SAC and the only way you can get there is by heavily constraining it and trying to pursue this. So that's the space that for me, I think someone solves it we'll buy it. Other people would use it, that's just mine.

[00:44:53] Patrick: What has you most excited about Ramp specifically in the next 12 to 18 months? Sort of that intermediate term, probably edge of your near term planning, what gets you excited? What's getting you out of bed?

[00:45:04] Eric: Just feel lucky and giddy, frankly, just to have the chance to ... This is sort of the moment that many of us had dreamed about years ago came sooner than we anticipated. But to do nine figures in revenue in less than two years from launches is a little bit wild. So some of this is just, "Don't screw it up, stick with it and stay humble." The ones for me, very specifically, some of my background was around turning data into savings for customers. The last company, we processed a hundred million emails a day to generate nine figures plus savings for our customers. I think that placement in some of the workflows that Ramp is in combined with the value can present back, I want to go a lot deeper there to go not just from laying best in class tools, but real interesting data products and saving time, money, everything on top of it is a big space that we can do a lot more of is one.

I think that the other one for me is overlaying of if you are deeply embedded close to the metal in the movement of funds, you have insights about what best in class looks like, could you make recommendations and build more efficient processes for people? So when you think about the card, it's fundamentally, it's a 30 day fixed product with inter change as a way to pay for it. But we're moving over in a matter of months after launching bill payments over a billion dollars a year through bill payment, reels and alike. Could you go and start to help people, no matter how they're paying, get more balance cash flows, more of every dollar an hour? So it's starting to take our fundamental components and mixing and matching them to new form factors, simple ways for however companies want to financially improve their company. Ramp will partner with you for doing that with high precision.

[00:46:39] Patrick: Eric, it's been so much fun. What a crazy business story you said, zero to a hundred million in a couple years is not common. So really cool to hear the story and how it was accomplished, and we'll keep going from here. I ask everybody the same traditional closing question. What's the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

[00:46:55] Eric: I mean, this is going to sound really trite. And I think it's believing in me and checking in. I think that one of the hardest things about starting and scaling a company over many, many years is it's a constant battle of, "It's not going to work or come back with proof." To have someone, and there's probably a dozen people who I'll never forget it at different moments who took a shot and said, you know what? I'm going to trust you. Go give it a shot and prove it and gave the rope, gave the possibility a chance for me to go and try. What else can you ask for? This fundamental, most unkind things that someone can do in business and also people's life is, far as I know, people only have one shot and I mean, the worst thing you can do is say, "No, I don't believe in you." Or, "Don't do this." And there's times when it's too busy, it's not good fit. But I think that giving people that shot and that opportunity, whether it's investing in them, it's spending time, it's simply saying, you know what? I believe this can work. How can I help? And being sincere about that is really rare.

[00:47:54] Patrick: It's one of the most common answers, as won't surprise you, taking a bet, maybe beyond the current evidence or beyond some need to or whatever, it's obviously something we should all do a lot more of. So, wonderful conversation Eric, thanks so much for your time.

[00:48:06] Eric: Thanks Patrick. Appreciate it a lot.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
