
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released July 25th, 2022
Invest Like the Best
Alok Vasudev - Searching for White Space
Alok Vasudev is the co-founder of Standard Crypto. We cover what advice he would give to crypto skeptics, whether the recent bubble in cryptoassets meets the definition of productive speculation, and look at some underestimated big ideas.

00:00:00
01:11:41
Introduction
[00:02:01] Patrick: My guest today is Alok Vasudev. Alok is an early stage investor who has been in the crypto space for a very long time. Before co-founding Standard Crypto, he was an investor at Benchmark and S28 Capital. Given Alok's experience and the prevailing mood right now in crypto, this is a particularly interesting discussion on the ecosystem at large. We discuss whether the bubble can be thought of as productive speculation, his views on skeptics in the space, and look at some big potentially underestimated ideas. Please enjoy my conversation with Alok Vasudev.

A View of the Current Crypto Ecosystem
[00:02:33] Patrick: So Alok, I think the benefit of this conversation today is the very long experience and perspective that you bring to our topic. And it's also a good time to be talking about crypto, because it's finally in a season where there's a lot that's gone wrong. There's been some extremely epic meltdowns in different parts of the ecosystem. I think the general tenor is very bearish and very skeptical and a lot of worry out there, and so it's a good time to have a conversation like this. Maybe you could just tell your story a little bit. I want to give frame of reference for those listening why you're different and interesting voice having come to this a lot earlier than most and I think having a unique way of thinking about the ecosystem and its potential. So maybe just give us a little bit of history lesson on your own experience here, and then we'll go into 30 different topics.

[00:03:20] Alok: I've been in venture for just about 10 years now. I started as a generalist venture guy. I was at Benchmark is where I started my investing career. Like any young person in venture, your job is to find white space. And at the time this was... SaaS was already big in early stage venture, consumer internet was raging, marketplaces were raging. Part of it was hunting for what's new, what's on the horizon, where can I plan a flag and build the type of reputation that can set me up to compete at the highest level? Open source was an interest of mine and consumer was a big interest of mine, because we did a lot of great work there at the firm.

And Bitcoin when I first encountered it was this hybrid of the two. In some sense, it's a community, it's a consumer facing product, it's money that you can hold and use, but it's built on an open source network, it's an open source protocol. I think those are probably the two veins that at least made me consider it as something I should decide to spend more time on or not. And it clicked. It was one of these things where you saw it, you understood it, and you realize that it was a disruption on so many dimensions. It was a monetary disruption, it was a technology breakthrough. It was a values disruption in terms of how we actually build organizations and the idea that decentralization could actually work in this configuration, whereas every other pressure in the world that you had was pushing towards centralization.

And also, there was a roadmap for how blockchains and the tech that underpinned it could become this fabric that you could do so much more on top of if you understood what was happening, understood where it could be upgraded or changed or improved, you could see compute being built on these blockchains, you could see all sorts of mind bending stuff built with it. Part of it was right time, right place. I think part of it was also having a text and upbringing where I think you have a default skepticism towards institutions, but I think you get in a place like Texas that you wouldn't get in other places. It fit me like a glove, and I never really look back.

I think that over time you always go through your own moments where you question your beliefs, you question what's going on, and crypto's cyclicality certainly does that to an extreme degree. But once you go through one or two or three or four of those, you realize that these things just start to rhyme. They're a part of what happens, they're unavoidable, but you also find they're necessary to some degree. And now here we are, we're in another version of the same thing, where I think a lot of the same factors are a play. Different reasons, different names, different specifics, but the broad structure I think holds today as it did in 2018 and 15 and 12.

[00:06:06] Patrick: You said something interesting there, which is your job as a young VC is to search for white space. What lessons could you offer about that kind of search abstracted away from crypto if you're talking to young investors out there? Not just VCs, any investor's probably job is to look for unturned rocks, white space, however you want to call it. What do you think it is to be great at searching for white space, just in general?

[00:06:28] Alok: That's a great question. Well, almost definitionally, it needs to be weird or non-consensus because that's your only chance. For me it was, I looked around my partnership room, I show up I'm a 28 year old who's never done venture before, and I look around my first partner meeting and Bill Gurley, Matt Kohler, Mitch Lasky, Peter Fenton, were the four GPs at the time. These guys were at the top of their games, how am I going to bring something to the table? Am I going to find a better open source company than Peter? Maybe, but it's not going to be structural. Better consumer company than Matt? Et cetera. It's almost like, "Well, what else can I do," other than try to find weird stuff that may have a chance to work?

It also helped that I came from a background in science and physics. I did my PhD at Stanford and double E, and I worked on applied physics research. And so I was curious about things that happened to actually work out. Synthetic biology, a lot of what was called frontier tech back when that was a meme, I think was natural for me to poke around in. I think it's about curiosity, it's about putting yourself in places where you're the only VC. That's a huge one. The number of VCs that I see go to networking events where there are 30 other junior VCs there. Again, almost by definition, if a bunch of other VCs are hanging around the same scene, then it's probably not weird enough or new enough. And so I always prided myself when I'd go to a meet up or go to an event and there was not another VC in sight, because meant that I was actually doing something that had the chance to actually be original.

[00:08:00] Patrick: If I asked that crew of four, sort of its own mini Mount Rushmore of sorts. If I asked that crew about the time they spent with you and what you were best at, what do you think they would say?

[00:08:11] Alok: Oh, that's hard to answer. I would say they could probably tell you a lot of things I was bad at.

[00:08:16] Patrick: Those are interesting, too.

[00:08:17] Alok: Always had a curiosity to me. And I think that led me to crypto. I think that I was pretty early Bitcoin crypto evangelist there. I would say that kind of intelligence, curiosity, being able to follow it. I can program a little bit, too. I had tried some things using that to source deals that we hadn't done before.

[00:08:37] Patrick: What about the inverse? What do you think that you were bad at back then that you've learned a lot from because you were bad?

[00:08:43] Alok: I was an awful employee.

[00:08:46] Patrick: Okay. How so?

[00:08:48] Alok: I'm bad at taking orders, bad at following instructions. I find that also I tend to gravitate towards things that give me energy, things that actually, say, shape my own personal curiosities. My big learning of my career is basically just find ways to do more of the things that naturally excite you and give you energy. For example, when you're thinking about Bitcoin and crypto all day, there are a number of other companies that you look over and you're like, "That's black and white compared to this full, vibrant color over here, and all you want to do is spend more time there." It was just like making sure that situations where it doesn't feel like work, and the more of that you make your work, the better off you are.

[00:09:24] Patrick: If you fast forward all the way to now, you mentioned these four or five cycles already that you've lived through in the world of crypto. I would say to sum up this skeptical view, it's something like, "Yeah, we get it, this is great. This is a new compute platform or database platform of sorts. There is a novel technology story here that started with Bitcoin, but we're getting impatient around where the use cases all are." And again, I'm trying to be like perfect summary of the skeptic's view that aren't tied back in some way to speculation on assets that move up and down in some price return setting. So like, "Yeah, there's some BFI exchanges that have been really successful, and there's these JPEGs," the skeptic would say, "that are really successful trading instruments. But like at the end of the day, this is just a unregulated casino." And to be clear, I don't believe a lot of this stuff. I do think that's the current summary is, a lot of these great sounding things are just learning the lessons that the traditional finance community learned over the last 200 years and the failures like Celsius are like three arrows or whatever, are just the same lessons learned again. How would you, in a broad sense, address that generic skeptic out there in midway through 2022?

[00:10:37] Alok: It's tough, because the skepticism, it's taken on so many different shapes and forms over the years. And to some degree, I think a lot of us within crypto have a sense of frustration with the skeptic one, because I don't think we have the quality of skeptics that we deserve. I think we get people that use the same crappy arguments for years and years and years. I also think there's a tendency to move the goal posts back when it comes to this like, "Oh, crypto hasn't done anything. What are the use cases?" And then somehow anything that we say is not legitimate enough, and that keeps being pushed back. But when you zoom out and you think about from 2012 to where we are now, we've dramatically expanded the capabilities, we've dramatically expanded what we're able to do with it. At one point it was "These tokens don't do anything." It's like, well, now we have token operated protocols that generate hundreds of millions in cash flow with 90% plus FCF margin, that use case is not legitimate enough for it to be valid in the eyes of some.

So I think that's why there's this base level frustration. I also think there were these moment in time things where there are moments when the overtone windows, so to speak, expands and new ideas can be introduced into the general population. And there are moments where that just can't happen. Satoshi had a great line in one of the old Bitcoin forums where someone was arguing about some mayor to Bitcoin. And he says, "If you don't believe me or don't get it, I don't have time to convince you. Sorry." I feel like to some degree, that's an approach that many within crypto have taken, because it's like, "I don't know if we're going to be able to ultimately address every form of this, we're just going to keep doing our thing. And over time you can keep moving your goal post back to the point where it's absurd, or you can just die on the hill."

I mean, that was a rant about skeptics in general, we've done so much in the space and it started... The core idea for a blockchain is it is a community operated computer. And I think a big problem that we spaced, it was one of the best and worst things that happened, is that we really had this currency overtone that I think really created a lot of the path dependence for how people from the outside view the space. And I think there are a couple traps that people fall into, like for example, people think cryptocurrency is this catchall, and they think that somehow these are all currencies competing with one another. And you look at coin market cap on the top 25, and these things might as well be the Euro and the US dollar, and the pound and all these things. And that's just the wrong mental model for it.

A better mental model is, you look at it like the S&P 500, and you say that each of these things is actually unique. It has unique fundamentals, it has its own unique addressable market. There's obviously competition, there's obviously overlap, but if you don't think about these things as individual entities that actually have their own first principles with which you should understand them, then you're missing basically the first step for understanding this stuff.

[00:13:36] Patrick: Do you think that it's most appropriate, just to piggyback on the S&P 500 thing, to think about, I'm sure not all, but many of these projects or networks as cash flow producing entities? Like you mentioned one that's operating with very high free cash flow margin. Maybe you could give us your favorite example of something that's sustained itself and is producing a flow of something back to its owners. Is that the right way to conceive of these things that it's just a different kind of stock effectively?

[00:14:05] Alok: Yeah. For some, absolutely. I think a lot of the defi protocols, that can be a really appropriate way to think about them. MakerDAO is an example. I'm going to gloss over some of the nuance with it, but ultimately MakerDAO, it's a stablecoin issuer. It issues Dai, a decentralized stablecoin. And there's a set of smart contracts that live on Ethereum that basically determine that issuance of Dai. You can post collateral into the Maker smart contract, and then you can borrow the stablecoin against it, subject to some collateralization ratio. And Maker the protocol generates income, there's a fee charged to people that borrow Dai, when they repay their loan there's a fee that they pay, and that fee is revenue to the protocol. And the protocol actually can take that revenue, and it's called a buy and burn.

So it goes and buys back its own tokens, the MKR token, which is kind of the unit of ownership for this protocol, it goes back and buys them on the market and it burns them, it destroys them. You can kind of think of it like a share buyback,. Where it's a form of directly converting an income stream into value to holders of that asset, of the MKR token. In that case, it's really simple to think about modeling out future cash flows and thinking about those to inform how you'd value the MKR token.

[00:15:32] Patrick: Let's take that example. Tell me about the pool of demand for Dai itself. So if this is a ecosystem that creates a sort of cash flow for the maker owners, and you could model it like you described, at the end of that chain is a demand of people that want Dai and want to do something with it, so tell me about that. What is the end use case for Dai itself?

[00:15:52] Alok: Well, Dai's a stablecoin, and so I think stablecoins are one thing we can point to as really one of the strongest forms of product market fit that we've had within crypto, especially over the past couple years. It's about demand for this form of a dollar that lives natively on a blockchain that you can send 24 hours a day. Most of the stablecoin market right now are centralized stable points like USDC and USDT. I'm sure your audience knows this well at this point, but you have a dollar deposit in the bank account and for every dollar deposit in the bank account, a company can issue one token that's backed one to one by that dollar. And we call those centralized stablecoins. And those are the lions share of stablecoin demand, and so decentralized stablecoins are basically a subset of the broader stablecoin market for users who care deeply about their stablecoin having one particular property, and that particular property is it not having this singular risk of the company that issues the coin getting shut down.

Understanding Stablecoins and Protocols
[00:17:01] Patrick: What about collateral is interesting to you, so that a digital programmable dollar is indeed a very interesting thing? There's obviously demand for it. I want to talk about what might happen if the US or Janet Yellen were to digitalize the dollar and whether that's a stablecoin competitor. But first maybe since there's been some fairly noteworthy blowups in this space more recently and everyone wants to talk about Tether all the time, just give us a little history lesson here. What matters most to you in the world of stablecoins, the idea of algorithmic stablecoins I think, again, to return to our skeptic, I would say it's just something to be dismissed. They're just going to inevitably blow up for some reason or another. They're not collateralized or something, maybe just give us a crash course here.

[00:17:42] Alok: Right now, there's this idea that if you want to find a good startup idea, just look at the Vitalik's blog, just build something that he wrote about. And that's a pretty good startup idea. My favorite kind of OG version of that is, so if all great up startup ideas are in Vitalik's blog, the actual upstream of that is the Bitcoin talk forms from like 2010 through 2013, because pretty much every-

Like 2010 through 2013, because pretty much every idea in crypto first existed on the Bitcoin talk forums way back in the day, including stablecoins. The first time I encountered a design for a stablecoin was Robert Sam's came up with the senior shares model for a stablecoin and he was a Bitcoiner, and it was out of that kind of Bitcoin community where it came from. We've since seen flavors of that design over and over again and every single time it's had the same unsoundness. Right? So I would say that people often throw... I think right now, like algorithmic stablecoins that concept is floated as being fundamentally unsound. That's the wrong lens. I think if you discard all algorithmic stablecoin you really are throwing the baby out with the bath water to some degree. I think it's this combination of algorithmic monetary policy with unsound or insufficient collateral where things go bad.

Whereas, I think you can have algorithmic monetary policy on top of a more structurally sound collateral base and it works fine. There's one that we work with called Reflexer and their coin is called RAI. And it's exactly that, it's algorithmic monetary policy but with a base of structurally sound collateral. So far that's operated as intended. So if I'm just building out kind of a two by two matrix here of good collateral, bad collateral, algorithmic governance, algorithmic monetary policy, and monetary policy set by humans, you can think about MakerDAO as an example of it's sound collateral but humans actually do the governance because it's the collective of the Maker token holders that can vote to actually establish rates within the system.

And then you have all of these senior shares models of which UST was a flavor of that live in this algorithmic monetary policy with unsound collateral. And then things like Reflexer RAI are algorithmic monetary policy that live with sound collateral.

[00:19:59] Patrick: Can you just describe what sound and unsound collateral, what those terms mean?

[00:20:04] Alok: Yeah. So it relates to the amount and what it is specifically. When you have no collateral or less collateral than you're borrowing against that's on sound. And the other one that it's especially important in some of these crypto designs is this idea of exogenous collateral versus endogenous collateral. Exogenous meaning this asset is really independent of the core stablecoin mechanism. So for example, if you are MakerDAO and you have ETH as your collateral. ETH is not wound up within Maker's mechanism directly and so it's exogenous. Whereas if MakerDAO had NKR as collateral, if its own governance token was a form of collateral, that would be endogenous. If that collateral went bad, there's kind of this systemic spiral that would take the whole thing down together. When you have exogenous collateral, that's kind of appropriately inappropriate amount, that's how I think about soundness.

[00:21:02] Patrick: And are there examples where, back to this idea that like, why is there demand for this seems like the ability to move dollars around is just something in high demand is very simple. Why does the US government not just digitalize the dollar and make it... If they were to digitalize the dollar what couldn't they do that a great well collateralized US dollar stablecoin would still allow people to do?

[00:21:27] Alok: I mean, there's certainly an agility and pace of innovation angle to it. I think that we've seen that the private sector can do that pretty well. There's a lot they could do with it just because they have the ability to make it so and kind of enforce it.

[00:21:43] Patrick: They've got the guns.

[00:21:46] Alok: It's funny, it's even hard to walk too far down that hypothetical just because it feels so implausible at this point. There is a clear vector for the government to enforce policy and constraints around stablecoins. We've already seen whitelist, blacklists, things like that for the at scale stablecoins that reflect things like OFAC compliance and reflect the will of the government. So I don't know if kind of building it all the way up from scratch, I don't know if a consensus is even possible within the government to implement something like that.

There's also some evidence that the government views stablecoins as is as positive and as a vector for dollarization around the world, which obviously has positive implications from a foreign policy and geopolitical standpoint for us. There was a tiny article, didn't get much play, but there was a South American government in exile that I think we were supporters of and at some point they needed an aid payment and it was actually implemented in stablecoins. For me, it was like, huh, this is the first time that we've actually seen our government using stablecoins to accomplish something. And so to me, that was like, I think there may be some voices in policy rooms that kind of agree that, hey, this is a really powerful way for the dollar just to spread. We have anecdotal evidence that this is actually the most successful form of a dollar to many people all over the world.

[00:23:21] Patrick: Yeah. I want to go back to this interesting definition you said earlier, which is that this is just a community operated computer, that's a bit different than maybe some of the earliest definitions I encountered, which is more of like a ledger or a database of who owns what assets, a way of achieving decentralized consensus around who owns what, if I'm to trust anybody. The community operated computer sounds like it's more general than that earlier definition. What do you think that means? It's a nice, elegant idea. We've got lots of computers. We've done a lot with them. It's been great. What is a community operated in that phrase unlock that a computer on its own can't make possible?

[00:23:59] Alok: In computers we have computers that are general purpose like a server within AWS or your PC. And we have computers that are domain specific or application specific like your calculator or your Fitbit. I think about Bitcoin it's a domain specific computer. It's a blockchain computer that really has one job and its job is to keep track of Bitcoin balances and make sure that you can send them around and that there's integrity in all the procedures involved. And then you have something like Ethereum, that's more general purpose in nature. It's still operated on the same fabric by the same principles. There's ultimately this decentralized consensus that needs to form on whether the computer's operating properly. But what you can do with it is you can do anything you want with it. You can write applications that do arbitrary things. That's been my frame for some time. To me, it's the right one that if you kind of believe that these are a fabric that you can do much more with.

You can think about so what does like community operated computer mean? You start by your own computer on your desk or at your laptop, it's a computer owned and operated by you. You decide what software you install on it. You decide when it's on. You decide when it's off. And then you think about a cloud computer like Amazon Web Services and it's owned and operated by company. They choose what software it runs. They choose who can access it. They choose when it's on, when it's off, et cetera. And then a blockchain computer is the same thing, but it's owned and operated by users. The Bitcoin computer, those policies. What does the software do? What do upgrades look like? Is it on or off? All of that is set by a combination of social and economic incentives in this fuzzy way by the people that own and operate it. Hopefully that kind of elaborates a bit on what I meant by it.

In terms of what does a community computer get you as a desirable property? It gets you unbelievable resilience. Bitcoin, as a computer has been up since 2009. I can't think of another computing service that's even had that longevity before. So, it's remarkable to me that we have a program, we have a computer that can just running up for that long. It's kind of staggering when you think about it in that way. Ethereum, similarly, a computer that's been running for years. I think that's one property that's really unique about these things. When we think about building these protocols, these immutable building blocks that we expect to live on for a really long time, the fact that you actually have a computer that can live forever, which means you can write programs that will run forever. That's something that's mind blowing that we've never seen before.

I think other things you get are you get the dynamism of open source, the dynamism of communities forming and innovating and able to kind of express views and innovate in weird emergent ways that's harder to get when you have systems that are more closed off. All the beauty that you get in the open source software world as applied in a much more full stack way.

[00:27:10] Patrick: Thinking about the resilience and uptime specifically, just to keep kind of pushing on that same thread, that does seem completely unique. What kinds of things does that unlock? The persistence and reliability of those two examples, which has been true, what does that allow for, again, some other computer wouldn't allow for as a class? I'm trying to hone in on like the sort of class of objectives that this sort of computer unlocks for the first time. And I know there's lots of examples we'll get to in terms of things that it's been used for in the last couple of years that are interesting and even like the stuff at the most cutting edge frontier today. But if you think about it as like a category of capability, what do you think resilience and persistence and the uptime allow for that's new?

[00:27:55] Alok: There's a class of uses that's previously been hard for computers to natively access, the basics of crypto and money and finance. The fact that I can hold this object that ultimately is lives on a computer. For me to hold an object that lives on a computer as a form of money with all the properties of durability, longevity, these things are just fundamental attributes of money. If you can't make really strong guarantees about the resilience of this computer, how on earth can you have a monetary asset rooted in one of these things that people can actually form a basis of belief in? So, that's one really like down the middle example.

Related, you can kind of grow from there to think about now like uses of that monetary asset. You can have financial rails that you can count on. Even stablecoins, if people didn't deeply believe in the resilience of the Ethereum blockchain, then I think that would undermine belief in pulling stablecoin and using them and using them to pay people, using them as assets that you really place a lot of belief in. And I think that even NFTs things like that, we're getting things like art. Things where like a really important property is its durability and its ability to be lendy and last across generations. And now we have a piece of artwork that lives on a blockchain that you can say I'm going to hang onto it for 100 years. I'm going to hang onto it 200 years. I'm going to pass it down to my children and it's viable because the substrate lives on can viably live for that long.

[00:29:30] Patrick: One of the things that I've talked a lot with our mutual friend, Gabe Leydon about specifically is Ethereum as this kind of crazy payment rail of its own. You don't need look any farther than some of the record setting like NFT purchases or whatever to see this in action. But I would constantly ping him with like this skeptical, how long can this really last, isn't this just nonsense? And he came back to me one time, he was like, how many times do you need to see this happen before you're convinced that this is wild? That there is something that's unlocked by the ability to send this much money, converted back into dollar terms or something this quickly to facilitate a transaction of this size. Let's set aside what's being bought and whether it's worth that or something, but just like the literal act itself, that's not happening elsewhere in the consumer world in the consumer sense. Obviously you can send lots of money, different ways. I found that interesting of just like, wow, okay. So if there is this growing trust in Ethereum, is it as a payment rail the thing that no one's talking about enough. What are those big ideas like that one in your mind today that people are maybe overlooking? There's evidence that it's already there, it's already operating, it's already happening and people are underestimating the potential impact. In the way I would frame it with Ethereum is what if in two years we see a $5 billion transaction that happens in an instant and it's because of Ethereum. Seems possible based on what we've seen today. Are there other things like that out there where you feel like something's going on, people aren't talking about it, they're not aware of it, they're not aware of the potential implications if we extrapolate it forward?

[00:30:59] Alok: I think the payments use case is almost going to be perpetually underrated just because we've known about it for so long, it's there. But I still think that it's just going to be underrated because it's so staggering in terms of what you can do, but it's also like we've already talked about it, let's move on. Even the way to frame people have oriented around how many transactions per second can you send, or can I do Visa scale transaction volume on a blockchain? And that's always been where the comparison is. But I always thought the money bandwidth concept is really interesting. Think about bandwidth, it's kind of a combination of it's two dimensional or how much can you send over a given unit of time? The money bandwidth of blockchain is crazy. You could send billions of dollars in 10 minutes. That's unprecedented.

To Gabe's point, I think that just the fact that these are truly unlimited payment rails that facilitates some of the largest commerce events that we've ever had in the Internet's history. It's going to be perpetually underrated as something that blockchains can enable. I mean, so many things in crypto are they go through this phase where these ideas come onto the scene and they strike a chord and there's an initial flurry of interest and excitement, but the early movers are imperfect in some way. And then you get some sort of a collapse. And then the entire notion is written off for dead. That's this pattern that's played out every single time we've had a crypto cycle. I think NFTs are probably like the prime example of what people are going to be talking about in that vein this time around. Like, oh, these things are dead. I can't believe we like spent all of that time talking about monkey pictures, what a waste. And then every time inevitably what happens is that the idea gets hardened, maybe there's a technology enabler, or maybe in most cases it's just kind of putting pieces together just properly where it works and it works in like a staggeringly big way. And it catches so many people by surprise, so that pattern's going to play out. It'll happen with NFTs.

NFT is just so obviously here to stay, they're so obviously this game changing building block for everything from providing seed capital to seed community, to ideas, that it's going to work. And I actually think if you looked at all of the tokens market cap collectively as a percentage, and you looked at ERC 20s or fungible tokens versus non-fungible tokens, I actually think the non-fungible token dominance against fungible tokens is going to increase over time, just because I think it's a better form factor for so much of the use cases, so many of the use cases that we wanted to use tokens with. That's one, I think anytime your instinct is to write something off for dead because it had a bust or this specific version of it didn't pan out in as durable ways you wanted, almost count on it coming back in a strengthened form the next go around.

Examples of Productive Speculation
[00:33:54] Patrick: Can you say a little bit about this notion of productive speculation that we chatted about before? I think Bill Janeway was the person that popularized this idea. It's a really interesting idea. Carlota Perez has done some work here too. Everyone agrees there's been speculation. Why has some of it been productive in your mind? And what does that concept mean?

[00:34:12] Alok: Janeway, he's amazing.

[00:34:14] Patrick: He's incredibly bright.

[00:34:16] Alok: He talks about the role of the state in innovation in his books where ultimately he views it as a critical part of this innovation supply chain and they provide a form of kind of capital and direction that really is the straw that stirs the drink downstream for kind of innovation that we get. One interesting observation about crypto is, and I'd love to see you're a student of tech history as well, I think it's the only platform shift or only kind of tectonic tech wave that's emerged that didn't originate with a monolithic buyer. In the sense that semiconductors kind of the computing industry, the government was the monolithic buyer. They were commissioning chips for missiles. They were building data centers for intelligence. And then you look at things like application software as computing matured and it was the enterprise that was the monolithic buyer.

In fact, like Janeway talks about this a lot but the idea that you would kind of presale multi-year licenses to buy applications kind of before the SaaS model was there. Part of why that worked is because they would pay upfront to subsidize the R&D costs of the innovator in order to ultimately deliver what they promised over the horizon of that contract. So you have government, you have enterprises and both these were kind of these monolithic buyers that basically through contracts subsidized the R&D work that led the maturation of these technologies. But crypto never had a monolithic buyer, it actually just had retail. It had people that were kind of putting in money into these things. So I always wondered if that was kind of a part of the volatility. That was a part of kind of why cryptos evolved in this path of a way is the fact it's kind of the only tech revolution that didn't originate in that manner.

[00:36:04] Patrick: Yeah, it makes me wonder what the answer is. Media came to mind at first, but the advertisers are kind of monolithic in their own way, especially early on in media. I guess, today, they're on the Facebook ad platform, or something, but certainly early media was monolithic ad buyers. Matt Ball writes about this in his metaverse book. The entire metaverse concept is perhaps like you're describing with crypto, one of the first major technology platforms that we don't really know what that looks like yet that doesn't have a monolithic buyer. It is more consumer driven, retail driven as you put it, but web three, and metaverse are probably in some ways linked together. So, maybe I'm saying the same thing. It's a really interesting observation. Like the lack of a monolithic demand pool is kind of wild when you really think about it. I'm curious, when you say productive, especially, what the best in your mind historical example of this is in crypto specifically. So there was some area of rampant speculation. We went through the cycle, speculators got wiped out, but something really important, and productive was established. What's your favorite example of that in action?

[00:37:05] Alok: Janeway's definition of productive speculation is where the euphoria in a bubble allows or facilitates the funding of RNB. That otherwise would not have been funded that ultimately leads to what he calls general purpose technology. Something that can be broadly applicable that creates value across the economy. That's kind of the general frame, so it's basically like what are the types of things that get funded in bull markets that actually play out often years down the line, or cycles down the line. Productive is where you say that I'm going to take advantage of the fact that the money's flowing and I'm going to build something real that may take more time, or that may be much harder that I may not have been able to capitalize in a moment where we didn't have this excitement. And then when it plays out, it's going to move us forward materially.

And so examples of that are Ethereum, as an example, in 2014, it was a story of Bitcoin and the altcoins. And then the idea of having a smart contract enabled blockchain, that was a wild concept a lot of people thought it was infeasible, unworkable. Ethereum raised money in kind of the hype of, still, it was kind of caught up one of those Bitcoin bubbles. It took a couple years for it to be built, but then that's an example of something that really pushed us forward as an industry in terms of really making this tangible general purpose blockchain computer. Another example in kind of 2018, I think that zero knowledge cryptography as a theme was still in the lab at the time. And there were companies like Startware, and disclosure, we work with them. That's an example of a company where zero knowledge cryptography was kind of on that cusp of going from science to engineering.

And there wasn't an obvious near term market for it. And so it really, I think, took the exuberance of a bubble in order to adequately capitalize a company like that to undertake years of really hard and pioneering RNB work. And here we are one cycle later where there are some of the most popular applications in crypto live on these stark chains, and they use zero knowledge proofs under the hood for improved performance. I think zero knowledge cryptography is going to be one of these general purpose technologies that we're going to see take all sorts of forms. And it's going to blow people's minds as it proliferates.

[00:39:32] Patrick: Bitcoin encryption, I could explain to somebody. I could not explain zero knowledge in any way, shape or form. Can you explain that?

[00:39:38] Alok: The simplest way to understand it, there's a bunch of really rigorous math, and cryptography behind it, but the essence of it is that I can prove something to you. I can prove a fact to you without revealing the specifics. If I'm doing some sort of zero knowledge proof of the amount of money I have in my bank account, I can construct a proof that I can hand to you, and you can kind of quickly easily verify this proof says I have more than $100 in this account, but you don't need to know where that is. You don't need to respect it. You don't need to know anything about it other than this proof is sacrosanct. It's done.

[00:40:15] Patrick: I don't need to show you the bank account screenshot. I can just... This is like an abstracted thing that proves something.

[00:40:20] Alok: Yep, exactly. The first application for these things that people are using them for is in blockchain scalability where blockchain itself, it's a computer and the computer is updating its state. Every time a program executes, it's going to execute its state. These are state transitions that a blockchain computer goes through. The job of the blockchain is to ensure that these state transitions it goes through are valid, through the rules of the computer. That means nobody's double spending money. That means...

[00:40:48] Patrick: This is the consensus mechanism usually. Yeah.

[00:40:51] Alok: Exactly. Zero knowledge roll up is a term, or if you use this a zero knowledge proof as a form of blockchain scalability, you can have a really fast blockchain that can prove that it operated correctly. And rather than needing to have every single node validate every single step themselves, which is how some blockchains operate today, this proof can suffice for the validity of what the computer did instead of like everybody replaying every single operation that a blockchain went through, they're just checking the proofs.

[00:41:25] Patrick: It sounds like that is like another bandwidth. It's just another speed upgrade that's been a Bitcoin takes 10 minutes every time to it's very slow moving computer, community operated computer. This is like something that unlocks fast community operator computers. Is that like an overgeneralization or is that roughly right?

[00:41:41] Alok: Yeah. It's another way to improve the speed of it. And that's the first, I would say, most obvious use of zero knowledge proofs, but I think it's going to get wild. I think it's going to get beyond that. Like for example. So let's say that you wanted to start in a non Twitter account. What are your problems, and how do you bootstrap that audience? What if you could construct a proof that said, "I can't tell you who I am, but I'm somebody who had this many followers on my real account", like zero knowledge, proof of audience as an example, right? These are the kinds of concepts that can be opened up by this stuff. And I think it's going to have broader implications beyond just blockchain, scalability.

[00:42:15] Patrick: It's an interesting portability concept. You can move credentialing, or signals, or value, or something across different networks. It's kind of cool. Kind of cool sounding.

[00:42:24] Alok: Exactly. Zero knowledge proof of being an accredited investor.

[00:42:29] Patrick: How does it get built, starts to bridge the question of how you can connect things that aren't native to the digital or even blockchain native stuff in the physical world, or some independent truth or things outside of the blockchains themselves that can somehow get linked onto blockchains. People talk about putting their house on a blockchain or something like this. How does that work? Like in the accredited investor example, now you're talking about, you're having to go off of a pure crypto native environment into antiquated old. A thing to prove that you're an accredited investor is the old here's how much money I have in my bank or here's my W2 or whatever the methods are. So how do you link something that's old and offline in a sense to something that is fast, and new and programmable, and online?

[00:43:11] Alok: This is where I think that zero knowledge cryptography can be one of these bridge solutions. At a high level, it's really about how do you extend trust guarantees around computing operations? Computational integrity is a term that a lot of people in zero knowledge talk about. How do you know that a computer is doing what you said it's doing? Proofs are one way that you can enforce a degree of integrity, or accountability on a computing service. For example, and again, we're getting into like wildly speculated territory here. I think this technology's still pretty nascent, and there's a lot to come. I would say, just undergone this transition from the stuff that's the domain of the research lab to stuff that now can be tinkered with in production, but you could imagine part of the problem is so off chain on chain has been really hard. And I would say that I kind of bias towards being an on chain maximalist in the sense that I think off chain on chain is something that always feels like just within arm's reach, but it always almost is perpetually like that.

And the fundamental problem for this is that you have competing systems of record. Competing ledgers. Blockchain is one ledger, and then you have the courts or the legal system for something else, that's a competing ledger. And ultimately like you want these two to keep in sync all the time, but there are situations where they can get out of sync, and then which authority reign supreme in most situations, it'll be the legal version of it. So then if the legal version is ultimately supreme to the blockchain version, what's the point of the blockchain version? That's kind of the argument for why putting your house on the blockchain makes no sense. You have a token that represents your house, and then somebody hacks it and they'd steal your token, or do you just walk out of your house? Like, I guess I lost it then. Off chain on chain, really hard.

And I think that for the most part, I'm not a big believer in people pushing the boundary and off chain to off chain. But with zero knowledge, you can at least say that, "Hey, I can guarantee that this particular compute task was done correctly." For example, anybody could do it right? It could still be permissionless. Let's say for this toy example, we're talking about that zero knowledge proof of audience thing. You could have a number of companies, or a number of entities who could run this task of you opting with Twitter. And then they kind of verify that you own that account. And they run some like compute task that verifies your proof of audience. If you have that proof, then you know the computation was done correctly. You've kind of now provided a guarantee for something that's been done in a way where other people can do it. You're not reliant on a single person to do it for you, but you still have a form of that guarantee. It's abstract.

Applications of NFTs and Crypto in Gaming and Art
[00:45:43] Patrick: No, I get it. I think this is the stuff that it's kind of like back to your original thing of white space. How many VCs could explain this? Far fewer that can... There's a lot of VCs in crypto now, right? Like it fills that test, but whereas like no one able to think or talk intelligently, it's interesting to explore these theoretical frontiers, you bring it back down to earth a little bit, and something that I've thought a lot about is gaming. Especially my conversation with Gabe, which has been one of the most popular that we've done in the show, and also one of my favorites. This notion of there being, that his advantage in the old play to earn video game world was that he had a live op team. And so he could sort of like pay to secure the value of the stuff in his games. And he could monetize there's a limit to that monetization at $100 a user, a transaction or whatever. Maybe one of the things crypto does is just unlock stuff in gaming, settings that were previously set by other platforms that you couldn't get around the $100 upper limit or something. How do you think this technology intersects with the world of gaming where we know there's tons of demand. We don't have to debate that. It's like obvious. We know people like to spend a lot of money on games. Like all these things are true. What does crypto do to the gaming world over the next 10 years, do you think?

[00:46:48] Alok: I would say like gaming applications of blockchains or blockchain assets, that's been conceived of pretty much since the beginning of the space. And I think people have pointed to things like in-game economies have become really important value drivers for modern games. Everyone talks about skins. Everyone talks about these types of things. And so like, it's been clear that, "Hey, like these two things they're probably going to fit together at some point", some of the crypto people, I think to some degree are a little bit more like optimistically forward, looking around it, right? The idea that you can take... I'm going to take my sword in this game because it's an open and interoperable sword. I'm going to go like play with it in other games. And there's going to be this shared economy between games and all that. Maybe. But I think that I'm pretty skeptical, at least in the near term of those type of ideas working.

But what I love about Gabe is that I think he's done a great job of correctly assessing what it is that crypto can give you that can blow minds in terms of what the experience of being a part of game is. But that's also rooted in what makes a good game, and what might people actually want to do. And does it actually jive with the incentives and motivations for all involved? I mean, unrestricted payments, I think people don't appreciate how big of a deal this is for games. The app store has the $100 limit on how much you could pay into it at any given time. And it takes a 30% haircut on anything that goes through. And so when you contrast that to like a middle of the curve NFT project routinely has asset sales in the tens of thousands of dollars, hundreds of thousands, dollars and millions in kind of the top end case, you just compare and contrast those two. And you're like, "Wow, there's such a big opportunity just to explore the upper end of monetization for games."

The idea that instead of driving millions of people to press the $100 button, a bunch of times, if you can get a much smaller fraction to press the million dollar button once, you can actually get an equivalent outcome in terms of value to the company, that's where I love the way that he thinks about it. And to me, it makes all the sense in the world because we have these singular moments of commerce that we've had on the internet, right? I think the blockchains probably set all the records for them.

[00:49:10] Patrick: If you think about the potential where a lot of the utility happens, but there's not like an investment return. My mind goes to this conversation I had with Alex Danko from Shopify and this notion of token gated commerce that Shopify is playing with where merchants can use NFTs in this case, or non-fungible tokens to privilege certain customers. And that could have some value, but maybe the NFTs themselves aren't that valuable. They're just something that you get that unlocks some benefit that itself is valuable. How do you think about that potential where, yeah, there's going to be an amazing amount of tech utility that comes because of this technology, but that doesn't necessarily mean you should buy Ethe, or the value may not accrue to Ethe, or Bitcoin or somewhere else. Do you think that's possible? How do you handicap that future? Because we've talked mostly about use cases, not so much about like investing perspective, investment returns of you're running an investment firm. So obviously I think there's investment returns to be earned, and historically there has been. How do you think about that potential of, huh, maybe this is DCPPIP, and it's unbelievably impactful, but no one makes any money from it.

[00:50:16] Alok: I think it's extraordinarily unlikely that kind of NFTs work. And then somehow the blockchains are built on top of, and the monetary assets that secure these blockchains don't also benefit from that value creation. Extraordinary, unlikely. I think there some deep structural reasons where kind of really can't have one without the other. For example, if you think about Ethe as a monetary asset or the qualities of its moneyness, one of the big benefits Ethe has as a form of money is its use as a unit of account within this growing blockchain GDP that we have, right? So NFTs are priced in Ethe. The trading pairs for on chain liquidity is Ethe denominated. So, that's a really important function of money. And Ethe has really done a terrific job with penetration on those dimensions.

And then the even deeper structural reason is that NFTs live on blockchains, and the economic security underpinning a blockchain is what gives you the guarantees it can operate. And that economic security is just related to the reserve token and whether it's an adequate incentive for people to maintain consensus. And so the higher the market cap of the token, the more valuable Ether is the harder it is for somebody to go and compromise the computer. The more valuable the block space in Ethereum is, the more valuable that is then the asset, Ether, should improve and value commensurate to that.

[00:51:42] Patrick: Yeah, I think that makes a lot of sense that these things won't be secured unless someone's incentivized to do it and that's money. I mean, at the end of the day. The NFT thing is so interesting and the world of art, I don't just mean like NFT art, but like music, or any form of art where there's big fan bases has become in this cycle integrated into this world. Like you see lots of famous celebrities with a board ape, or you have examples of musicians that are adopting this technology to sell NFTs and make a lot more money than they might have in traditional means even doing concerts or something. Tell me what you think about what's going on in the world of art, and IP around art in all its forms and how that could intersect with this technology.

[00:52:26] Alok: I mean, you're spot on. Like what I said earlier is I think that NFTs are a great way to seed capital and seed community is what you can get with NFTs. It's one of these things where I think that a lot of the celebrity NFT drops are probably in the unproductive speculation category that we talked about earlier, but there are a number of these things, this concept of, hey, I want to pursue a creative endeavor of some sort. And I'm looking for seed capital and a seed fan base around me. An NFT is a great fit for that. As an artist, you've got a chance to... You get to capital, you've got kind of an embedded fan base, and you've got a community that you can use that can grow over time.

And as a member, you get all the special feelings of kind of being in on something early, everything from like it being a form of your identity. And to even this idea that maybe there's even upside in it, right? Maybe I can even follow along the journey for something that I'm a part of and even get rewarded somehow some way for it. One of my favorite stories about the role of internet community in actually creating, and succeeding with aiding a creative endeavor at the highest levels is The Martian, have you seen, like obviously Matt Damon blockbuster movie, but...

[00:53:38] Patrick: I remember reading the book.

[00:53:39] Alok: Yeah. Well, do you know the origin story for the book?

[00:53:42] Patrick: I knew it at some point, but remind me, I forget.

[00:53:45] Alok: Andy Weir had a day job as a programmer, I believe. And he was just blogging chapters of The Martian and he would post a chapter on his blog. And then like a couple months later, he'd post the next one, people on the internet found it. And he got basically this fan base that was building up this community that was forming around it. They would do things like fact check the science for him. They would add value to the story. And, of course, they were in on it. They were ... Can't wait for the next chapter to drop. I imagine that community, and the fact that he had a fanbase that he can point to, probably played some role in him securing the book deal. And, of course, the book was a best seller and that validated the concept to get the movie green-lit. And so this idea that actually an internet community was there on the ground floor, in this creative endeavor that ultimately went the distance, I think it's just such a cool story. That's one of the examples I point to as to where yeah, we could do more of that. And that feels like a thing that we're going to get more of in the future, not less of.

Smoothing Away the Crypto and Other Controversial Opinions
[00:54:44] Patrick: There's this notion, that you've mentioned before, which is around the importance of obscuring complexity to get this thing to the next level. The idea of a ZK-rollup. Like the next Andy Weir is not going to have any frigging idea what that means, but he probably would quickly understand the general notion of what that example might mean and to do in practice. So are those companies being built? Are the companies being built that would be the platform that's simple to use and easy to understand, and I don't give a crap what's going on under the hood but it's facilitating this kind of interaction with my fanbase, or something? Is that stuff happening? When do you think that will become the norm, that emerging artists of various kinds will think about their art and their fanbase in this way?

[00:55:29] Alok: I believe it's somewhat of a controversial opinion on this, which is that here's this idea that we need to kind of smooth away the crypto, abstract away this stuff, make it really polished, make it really frictionless, make it look like products and services that you're used to using. Only then will we have mass appeal. It's going to cope for not having good enough draws for the mass market into crypto yet. I think what we found is, for example, early in NFTs there was these ideas that ... I'm talking kind of pre-2021 and even early 2020, this idea where how do we get more mainstream digital artists? How do we get people that are outside of the crypto orbit to start to use this stuff and think about it?

You'd go through these painstaking steps to, "Well we'll let you get paid in dollars. You're never going to have to touch a cryptocurrency. You'll never have to have a wallet. We will make it seamless. It will be like using Substack or something like that." And it worked, right? I think there were people that were like, "Yeah, you've adequately removed friction for me and so now I guess I can try this thing." And then what happened is NFTs went bananas. They struck a chord and the appetite for NFTs went haywire. Then it was the total opposite and you had people saying like, "Well, excuse me, where do I connect my MetaMask here? And why are you not giving me eth?" And it's one of these situations where you're like, "Oh, it turns out that NFTs weren't just ready. Once they're ready people will meet us where we are because they want it and we've struck a chord, in terms of what they actually want to do."

That's why I think even especially for thinking about this idea of NFTs as a substrate for early financing and coordination around creative endeavors it's Jeffrey Moore 101 stuff. It's really understanding who are the early adopters? And understanding that new concepts have this diffusion, like a law of physics that they follow. You can't skip steps in that progression. And so it's not about just, "Am I going to appeal to a mainstream writer today that's going to turn down a book deal in order to do this weird NFT community thing?" That's probably not the right fit. The right fit is somebody that's just the right ... They are a creative genius and they can succeed at the highest levels but they need this medium in order to actually achieve that potential. So they probably know something about crypto, they probably have a stronger point of view on the right way to use these tools to accomplish their goals. They're kind of the definitional early adopter for something new. They live in the same future as the creator of the tools or the platform.

[00:58:13] Patrick: Yeah, I love that concept. I think it's really cool. Maybe we shouldn't zoom all the way to the end. You have to build your way there. What other controversial opinions do you think you hold, in the crypto community specifically? Like are there things that if I got 10 other super smart people onto our Zoom they'd think you're nuts about but you believe strongly?

[00:58:31] Alok: Unchained maximalism, like I described earlier. And this actually stems to kind of the NFT-IP question, which is interesting. There's this idea that can we have things like IP rights attached to NFTs? Maybe like the use of IP ... Or the downstream monetization of IP can we have a way for that to flow back in some for to the holder of an NFT? I tend to be more skeptical about these ideas. Again, just because I think that reconciling stuff in the legal system with stuff in the blockchain is just really hard. I don't know, this may be contentious but I'm really intrigued by this CC0 movement in NFTs.

[00:59:10] Patrick: What's that? No, I haven't.

[00:59:13] Alok: It's a really interesting idea and it's still in the space where I have no idea if it's going to work or not. I want it to work because I think it'll create a very interesting future, if it does work. With NFTs there's IP behind these NFT projects. And we can think about a basic art PFP 10,000 picture NFT drop, as the example here. There are some situations where the IP is owned entirely by the company that issues the NFTs. The company can do a deal with that IP and they can make money on it but there's not necessarily a right to any of that that you have as a holder of the NFT. Then there's another situation where the holder of the NFT actually gets the IP license for their NFT. If there's a deal done where this NFT is used in an ad or something like that and your NFT was used, or something like that, then you would be entitled to that or you could sue them for claim on cash if you didn't get anything from it.

The core idea here is that there is some IP, these NFTs have licenses that are protected, and then we're kind of debating who controls it, who has the rights to income from it and who decides how it's used. And, ultimately, that requires reconciling the blockchain with some sort of off-chain legal system. The same applies for music if you're promised royalties, et cetera.

And then there's this idea, CC0, which is Creative Commons license, which is the same ... Like Shakespeare is under this license, right? Basically free to use, do whatever you want with it. There's this movement within the NFT space where what if you just didn't put a license on the NFT at all? What if it was just literally do whatever you want with it? Could it work? If you owned an NFT and let's say you had no structural claim on the IP with it, but if maybe that meant that the NFT project could actually get distributed further it could actually have more cultural relevance because you removed barriers for it spreading far and wide, could that actually have an indirect feedback loop where you still ... Your asset still becomes more valuable?

[01:01:20] Patrick: Yeah, it's like what if Apple's takeover Zero kind of idea?

[01:01:23] Alok: Yeah. There's the project Nouns DAO that I think a bunch of Ethereum people, myself included, love and we think of this as one of these really interesting concepts in the NFT world that a lot of people are paying attention to. I would say it's probably one of the most notable CC0 project. And we've seen the Nouns' glasses has become this iconic image from this project and we saw it in a Super Bowl commercial. I think Budweiser, one of the beer companies, had the Nouns' glasses in the Super Bowl commercial. They didn't pay royalty because all of that Nouns' IP is CC0. It's this really interesting question of kind of indirect value accrual. And there's a really cool frame on it where right now, with IP, distribution and monetization happens along the same access. I get views on YouTube and I get paid for those views on YouTube. I get listens on Spotify and I get paid for those listens on Spotify. And there's this inherent tension between getting it distributed far and wide but also being able to bear hug it, so you can make sure to get what's yours.

If CC0 and NFTs are in a deal, what if there's now like another access to this? What if you can monetize in a way where you don't have to even think about constraining distribution? I don't know if it's going to work. It's one of these things where it's like ... But the world to me where you can actually think about IP just as free flowing and you can remix it, and you can do whatever you want, it's a pretty interesting kind of form of abundance that I don't think we've seen yet with IP. And if NFTs could be the solve for where value can still be created I think at least it's a very interesting version of the future. But I totally understand how it's going to fall on its face as well, because it's really nice to be able to directly make money from IP.

What Alok is Most Bullish and Bearish on
[01:03:13] Patrick: We're recording this in the summer, mid-summer of 2022. From this vantage point, in the crypto ecosystem, what are you most bearish on and most bullish on right now?

[01:03:24] Alok: I'm incredibly bullish on Ethereum as an ecosystem. Everything ... Every advantage its had has, in my mind, been strengthened. I think there are a few upgrades and changes in the pipeline that are going to further improve it. I think it's always been the ecosystem that is at the top of the innovation supply chain in the space. In the sense that all the newest and zaniest, and best, ideas tend to take place within the Ethereum community first. The ecosystem's done a great job, over time, of just systematically addressing the biggest issues with it. In 2017 it was, "This thing won't scale and your roadmap for how to do it is ridiculous. Imagine a world in where within the community people just build things that have higher performance that attach to it. This idea that you don't have a centrally coordinated company developing and hiring engineers against a roadmap that's never going to work. This idea that you can just plant a flag for how you think it should work and then let the community almost build the bridge along the way." But that's exactly what happened.

We have rollups that are functioning, we have sidechains that are functioning. Every single thing that people thought couldn't happen but Ethereum kind of ... The community at large chose is kind of working out. I still think it's just underappreciated as one of the most monumental tech projects we've ever had.

What am I most bearish on? In this moment I'm very bearish on things that really need count on retail speculation as a driving force for it functioning or gaining adoption. In general it's not great when you're counting on that as a chief component but I think especially so when we're not going to have any for some time, if you're not viable in a fundamental way then it's not going to work. I actually think people deeply appreciate how much retail speculation was the driver for a lot of what we saw, even things that were dressed up as not speculation driven. Like the yields that people talked about in DeFi. Where'd the yields come from or the eye-popping yields. I think that if you actually decompose those yields and where do they actually come from, where is $1.00 being turned into $1.10, a large part of those yields somewhere, however many steps behind the scenes, there was some token that was ultimately being bid up by retail speculators that was being market sold, that generated the yield. So when that goes away the yield collapsed, everything goes away.

I think there are genuine structural sources of yield within crypto that are real and sustainable, and they're probably rightly so not going to provide eye-popping numbers. But, for example, like staking for blockchain security super structural and it's like a net new form of yield that we've never seen before because blockchains are new. If you're counting on some bottoms-up movement or speculation to really drive what you're doing it's not going to work. I think a large part of ... I would say like the second half of what we saw in DeFi a lot of those ideas had that base assumption in them. I'm pretty bearish on off-chain to on-chain stuff. Even some things like reconciling IP off-chain but kind of keeping the on-chain piece working. That, to me, feels really hard. There may be narrow situations where it could work but I think as a category it's not going to work.

If we do this again in years I'll be perpetually bearish on enterprise blockchains. That's the easiest punching bag out there. The idea that these things are just like a database and token doesn't matter. One day I hope we'll fully disabuse ourselves of that notion.

I actually feel like I'm an optimist by default, so all this stuff is going to work. NFTs are going to work. Crypto gaming's going to work. Blockchains are going to scale. Most of the Web3 concepts that we're talking about are going to work. It's just a question of the sequencing and what do we need as structural enablers from a tech standpoint, and from a behavior change standpoint? And then how much learning from trial and error do we need as an ecosystem, as an industry in order to actually just get it just right where it can actually go the distance?

[01:07:29] Patrick: Well, Alok, this has been so much fun. I mean, there's so many concepts here that ... I'm always drawn back to this because I'm a funny case where I've spent so much time talking to the smartest people in this world, never really put a whole lot of money into it. You know much to my chagrin looking back, even though it's been ugly recently. I've loved our conversation because I think there's a lot of cool new ideas, whether it's the bandwidth of money, the Creative Commons concept, the four-by-four quadrant around what makes for an effective stable coin. Lots of great interesting ideas. I think you know I ask everyone the same traditional closing question. What is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

[01:08:04] Alok: When I was in high school I was working at a sandwich shop and one of our neighbors, who is one of the most distinguished chemists of all time and he's a prolific researcher but he was my next store neighbor, and he saw me in this sandwich shop. And he was like, "What are you doing in a sandwich shop?" I was like, "I don't know, making money." 15, what do you want? And he said, "Do you want to work in my lab?" Basically I got the chance, as a high schooler, to work in his lab. I had basically taken one chemistry class at that point.

I had gone through some personal stuff. My dad died about a year before that and so I think part of it was just like him just helping me on a very human level, but what it did was it really set me on a path where science became something that I really fell in love with. And it became so fundamental to who I was and a part of my identity. It set me on a really terrific trajectory, academically and professionally. I had published papers in high school, which sets you up for research in undergrad, which sets you up for research in grad, all these things. And so it was awesome. And I don't think I'd have accomplished anywhere near what I have if it weren't for Grant Wilson.

[01:09:14] Patrick: Do you remember the first thing you worked on in the lab for him?

[01:09:18] Alok: I do. My job was to produce these things called myerhotherplots. It's semiconductor chemistry. And the idea is you have these things called photoresists, which are chemicals that you put on top of a wafer and you selectively expose the photoresist to light. And then you can dissolve the parts that haven't been exposed to light, so it forms like a mask on top of it. So you put a mask on and then you can either etch away the parts that are exposed or you can grow another layer. And that's how these integrated circuits are built, layer by layer, where you're basically masking each time to connect all the wires. We were working on photoresists and the way we're ... Again, this is hilarious that we're getting into this. But if you want to make the resolution of these masks higher, you want to have smaller features, one way to do it is you want to have smaller wavelengths of light that actually do this photochemistry within them. The smaller the wavelength of light the smaller the feature you can define in the mask, the smaller and higher performing semiconductor chip you can write with it.

So we were working on cutting edge photoresist chemistry for a lower wavelength of light that hadn't really been pioneered yet. And the goal was we were trying different things to figure out what worked. And I was the guy that would basically test how well it worked. And so it meant me just having this big truckload of samples and putting them on wafers, and shining light, and measuring things. It was a very mechanical form the way it worked but it was very much the grunt work in the lab. But I loved every minute of it.

[01:10:47] Patrick: What a wonderful story. I wish there was some way to manufacture a similar experience to that for every 15 year old. I would have benefited so much from something like that at that age. What a cool, amazing kindness. I love it. Alok, this was a blast. Thank you so much. Great closing story. Great set of ideas. I really appreciate your time.

[01:11:07] Alok: Thanks man.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
