
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released June 7th, 2021
Invest Like the Best
Gabriel Leydon - Designing Digital Economies
Gabe Leydon is the co-founder and former CEO of MZ, the company behind hit games such as Mobile Strike and Game of War. We cover why great design can actually be a bad sign, why he believes NFTs will create billionaire influencers, and how different cultures design games.

00:00:00
01:17:45
Introduction
Patrick: [00:03:14] Today's conversation is one of my favorites in a long time. My guest is Gabe Leydon, who was the co-founder and CEO of MZ, also known as Machine Zone, the company behind huge games such as Mobile Strike and Game of War. Gabe has spent the last 20 years designing video games and is one of the most original thinkers I have talked to in a long time. In our conversation, we cover why great design can be a bad sign that we've run out of ways to innovate, the most important lessons from human psychology for building games and products, and why products which are busted or breaking but still booming can be great investment opportunities. This conversation rewired my brain on many levels, so I'm excited for you to listen. Take the red pill with us and please enjoy my conversation with Gabe Leydon.

Importance of Design
Patrick: [00:03:59] We're going to red pill the audience here.

Gabriel: [00:04:01] No, we're not. No, we're not.

Patrick: [00:04:07] My whole goal with this interview is to get you to dole out as many red pills as you can.

Gabriel: [00:04:10] No.

Patrick: [00:04:10] I know you're going to restrain yourself, but we'll do our best. The first red pill of the discussion is around the topic of design. There's a huge emphasis on design right now, and I think you've got an interesting take on what an emphasis on design means about where we are in capitalism. What are your thoughts on the importance of design or what it might mean?

Gabriel: [00:04:30] I see this push for, you see a lot of people, they're making productivity apps and they're claiming it's a game now. I see things going in this pattern where when things are innovative, nobody really cares what they look like. If I made up a teleport machine and it was the size of an arena and it was covered in slime and smelled really bad or something, I don't think anybody would care. There'd be a line around the block. Everybody would just jump in and they would think it's the greatest thing ever. But over time we kind of would make it smaller, and then the artists would come in and try to make it look nicer and feel better. And once you kind of get to that design phase, Silicon Valley's been in for about 10 years, there's only so much you can do to make something look better.

If you remember 5 years ago, everybody was talking about delighting their users, and delighting was just like, "We don't have any more ideas. So we're just going to feel a little bit better because we're out of ideas. So now we're going to just delight you." And the game design stuff is, "we don't know how to make this look better, so now we're just going to tap into your human condition of biology and psychology to make our products better. Because we don't know how to make them more innovative, we don't know how to make them better looking, but we can add levels and achievements."

How that presents itself is all of a sudden you're getting achievements for buying erectile dysfunction pills from Hims. You buy extra orders of minoxidil to max out your Hims account. That's sort of what we're seeing. And it's funny too because that's all I've been doing for 20 years, is that kind of stuff. And while I was doing it, I just thought I was wasting my time working on video games. I thought you have Google's being built around you and Facebook and all this stuff, and here you are making video games and you just feel like the losers of technology. The losers make video games, and it's kind of true in a lot of ways. But recently it's kind of like everything's turning my way. Everything's becoming, you see this kind of talk about everything becoming a video game, and it's pretty bizarre to me because it even caught me by surprise. 20 years feeling like you're wasting your time, and then all of a sudden feeling like, "Hey, am I really good at the world's most important skill all of a sudden?"

It's very interesting, but I actually see it as a bad sign. We're basically running out of new ideas. The economy is just becoming more and more psychological and it's less about innovation and more about understanding your condition as a person and then building a product around biological and psychological reflexes rather than a teleport machine that can move you around the world. So I think you're seeing more and more of that.

Patrick: [00:07:26] It reminds me of that Neil Postman book, Amusing Ourselves to Death, that Huxley's version of the future was more accurate than Orwell's.

Gabriel: [00:07:32] I think it's because when people think about capitalism, they think about the early 1900s. They think about cars and radios and TVs and microwaves and it almost never ends. And I think it peaks in the '60s and the '70s with all that futurism. The futuristic art, flying cars, and skyscrapers. And that's the same time we go off the gold standard and there was this infinite optimism around money printing and innovation basically. And we could just print as much as we want because we're going to be immortal space beings, zapping around the galaxy. So who cares?

That didn't happen. So when the innovation growth didn't really match the expectation, it's just like things just start getting designed, they start moving towards the design phase, and then eventually a gamification phase, like what you're seeing in the financial markets and software and pretty much everything.

I'm not a big person on late-stage capitalism. Capitalism is just a human condition. What does that even mean? I think it's more like we just don't know what to do anymore. So we're just going to add levels to the stuff that we already know how to do. And there's a lot of margin in it too. So it'd be, it's like a big gravity well where it's like, "Well, we can just take the existing stuff and add achievements to it and we'll sell more pills."

There's also another part of it in the Silicon Valley where ... And you're a VC, so has anybody ever tried to pitch you a video game? Do you understand it at all?

Patrick: [00:09:02] No.

Gabriel: [00:09:03] Right. So when you pitch video games, the first slide in your deck should be why you're not like Zynga. Because it's all anybody's going to ask you, is like ... Zynga's doing great now, but for a decade if you were making a video game company, you might as well just spend the first 30 minutes talking about why you're not like Zynga because that's all these guys know about. And the financiers, the financial guys, they're jealous of the retention. They're jealous of the engagement. They like the monetization, but they don't like video games. But it's also really mysterious to them. They have no idea what it is. So when you go in and pitch a video game, it's really kind of, it just becomes a funnel analysis conversation. What is your installs cost? What's your retention? That's it, that's all they really care about, and then you have to convince them that you can keep doing that.

God forbid if you're a FinTech company, because oh my, these people know everything about it. If you go in there and you pitch a FinTech company. Anybody who gets funded in a FinTech company is a genius. They're all super genius. They know absolutely everything because they can be vetted from here to the moon. But there's also these people kind of in the middle that are building a lot of products that add gamification because the VCs and those type, they actually don't understand it at all. So it adds this level of mystique to your product that the VC can't quantify, but they like. So you see this big push towards that because it makes them seem cool or interesting in a way that they can't comprehend, and then they kind of hope you end up being the Fortnite of email apps. And it's like, they have this crazy idea in their head like that's what's going to happen. And of course, it doesn't happen that way, but it is kind of this confusing, in my opinion, purposely confusing way to describe their productivity app.

Patrick: [00:10:49] So if game design becomes super important. You've mentioned to me before this question, you used to ask people you might hire to be game designers, so maybe you could tell us what the question is and why the answers all sucked? Why did nobody ever have a good answer to that question?

Gabriel: [00:11:01] When people talk about game design and apps, nobody's talking about a gigantic bat that is blocking your inbox and you need to find this legendary pink beanie with cat ears on it to max out your shriek level to destroy the bat to get your email. Nobody's talking about that. That's not what they mean. What they mean are these features that create predictable outcomes. They don't really mean video games. So I think that's important to recognize because there is a difference. There's a big difference between the art of a video game or the sound design of a video game or exploration or whatever and what Silicon Valley talks about is gamification. These aren't the same things.

So when you're making a game especially, gosh, my question is really related to free-to-play, this weird combination of Silicon Valley funnel metrics and video game design and marketing and a bunch of other things. The purpose of this question is not to actually get an answer necessarily, but to expose your bias. Because free-to-play is a business and it's tough because you're giving away your game for free. Most people don't pay and you have to somehow make money in that scenario.

So what I would ask everybody and it's not necessarily literal. It's more of just exploration. Is design a feature that costs $1 million to complete? And the responses that you get from that question. I mean, if you just think about it, I almost want a long pause in the podcast, just let everybody just try to answer that.

Patrick: [00:12:41] Just pause and think about it. Yeah.

Gabriel: [00:12:42] Yeah, just pause and think about it because you're going to find yourself stuttering, stammering. You'll end up coming up with God mode. You'll say, "Well, just give them something that makes them like God, basically." They'll end up coming up with something like that, or a rare item like there's only one of them.

Patrick: [00:12:58] That's what I did.

Gabriel: [00:12:59] But I asked for a feature, not an item. So they take the easy way out. The follow-up question is, design a car that costs $1 million, which is very easy. And the reason that is, is because you like cars and you hate video games. That's a really important thing to recognize about yourself just in general, just in designing products. It's very easy to design a $1 million car in your mind because I love cars and $1 million for a car makes sense to me in some ways. But if I change the question to design a game feature that costs $10, all of a sudden it's very easy. It exposes the root of the thinking of the person around their own limitations on what they think a game should be. Which honestly, it's a great question just in general because you can really find out someone's biases. And if you're hiring a games designer, a game designer is essentially the CEO of the company. I don't care what anybody says. You can be the CEO, you've got a game designer in a video game company, that's the CEO. They tell the artists what to do. They tell the engineers what to do. They tell everybody what to do. And if they're in their head, they're going, "Oh, I don't really like spending money on video games." Yeah, that's going to be a big problem. That's going to be a problem. And so it's not that games are all about money, but if they're free, there's an aspect of it that is. You need creative people who can handle really tough problems and not necessarily around amounts of money spent or whatever, but just in general. Because you have to balance two different things in your head between the player and the business.

I feel really fortunate because I have been in games for a long time, but I spent the first seven years of my career in the arcade business, which at the time was a complete waste of time. Once I couldn't get any more jobs making arcade games, nobody would hire me, my resume was a joke. I'd only worked on the coin-op games. But in that business, I was a kid. I was 19-years-old testing Atari Midway, it was still the real Atari. Milpitas, California. Ed Logg was still there, the guy who made Asteroids. One of my best friends, Aaron Hightower, was there. One of the early guys on Pilot Wings. Pretty much the people that invented software, modern software. And I was 19 and I didn't really realize who I was working with. I mean, it's the same place Steve Jobs' first job was at.

I was in there as a tester, like a typical gamer, and just complaining about how the game sucks and it should be better or whatever. It got really bad. I was a tester for San Francisco Rush 2049, which is the hardest probably...well, the second most difficult driving game of all time, the game is really hard. Except for the sequel, 2049 was easier than San Francisco Rush. And I was so upset because I was really, really good at the first one and I wanted the second one to be even harder because I spent thousands of hours getting good at it. And I'm in a room and they kept moving me around rooms because I kept complaining all the time. So before they laid me off, I ended up in a janitor's closet testing a game.

But I was in one of the rooms, so after they moved me out of the office and I was in this room and Steve Richie was in the room and Steve was working on a game called California Speed, which was a competitor to the biggest, most successful arcade driving game of all time, Cruis'n USA. And I was complaining about the Rush sequel and he goes, "Gabe, come over here." I get up. He goes, "Look at this. What do you think makes the most money in the arcade?" I said, "I don't know." And I kind of knew it wasn't going to be Rush just based on the question. And he goes and he shows me the list.

And in the arcade business, you get earnings reports of all the games. So the arcades will collect the earnings reports and they'll send them back to the manufacturers to get an idea. Because these people buy these games as investments, and I had no idea. I was just playing video games, and arcade games are investments. They have a dual mandate. They have to make money for the investor in 90 days, and they have to be fun. They have to get two and a half continues from every player who plays them, basically. That's a hell of a thing to do at the same time, make an investment for somebody that has a small footprint. It's not too heavy. The parts, if they break, they're easy to replace. There's a lot of things that you have to do to make something for the investor. And at the same time, it's got to be good enough for the players to keep putting money into it.

Steve shows me and the number one arcade game in the whole country was Cruis'n USA. Cruis'n USA is a driving game that if the gas pedal is broken on the machine, it just goes for you. If the steering wheel doesn't work, it doesn't matter because the game is on rails anyway, and you always get third place. And here I am complaining about the hardest game of all time basically not being hard enough. And that was a big moment. I mean, God bless Steve Richie because that was a big moment for me and I realized, I was like, "Whoa, this is actually a business." They're not just making this thing to be fun or cool for me. They have to figure out this complex combination of games for investors and games for players.

That set up for me as a 19-year-old kid really set me up for the rest of my career. I understand, I had a pretty deep understanding of having to do both things at the same time. So when you interview game designers, they all know how to add pets. They all know how to make levels or whatever. They all know how to play Pokemon. They've all been playing Dungeons and Dragons for thousands of years. They know how to do this stuff. But they don't know how to do the other side at all and they actually hate it. So that's why I ask the question because if you hate the business side of it, you're not going to be good at it.

Patrick: [00:18:28] What is behind it that allowed you to be so good at this. So I think at its peak, the games that you built and that you designed. You were the CEO of the company, but I think you're also the lead game designer. What was it from that early coin-op experience or just some other experience that let you be good at that question that so many were bad at answering in the free-to-play context specifically?

Gabriel: [00:18:47] There's two ways that people go about it. Josh Buckley was recently on your show and he mentioned something that I put together years ago around the qualities of a game. I love Josh, but he sort of mischaracterized it as flow and all this stuff. But the reality is, is he added a fourth piece, but it's really three. It's variable outcome, frequency, and sense of control. These are three things that create addiction, not flow. The human brain is built to learn. The brain needs to learn, it has to, it cannot be stuck in a state of learning. So what these three things do is when you have random outcome, variable outcome, you can't predict what's going to happen next. And then you have it happen frequently, over and over and over and over and over again. And then you layer in what's called the game, which has sense of control. Meaning that sense of control, it's not actual control, because it's a variable outcome, sense of control.

How these manifest itself is stuff like stop buttons on slot machines. Those don't do anything but tell that to someone playing the slot machine. So if you put somebody in a highly variable, frequent, with hopefully a complex sense of control, some kind of interface between this variable outcome, frequent thing that you've designed. The brain actually just malfunctions. It doesn't know what to do. It gets trapped in a learning state and starts inventing ways out. So this is how you end up with our lucky rabbit's foot, because the brain is just so freaked out about not being able to figure out what's going on, and the reward of getting money out of the slot machine, or whatever, is so big, it's going to start inventing patterns. It has to, it has no choice. That's like a style. You can see it too.

Like I love telling poker players that the game is random. I love saying it's all luck. They lose their minds. And you could see the success of the sense of control. If you've ever talked to a poker player, they've totally lost their mind. They actually see the whole world through poker playing. You always know a poker player, because they'll sit down and talk about how all of their decisions are based on the odds, of this, that. It's total nonsense. The game has so thoroughly conquered them, that they see the world that way, they have to invent solutions. You have to, your brain has no choice. It will invent solutions no matter what. So that's a style. And the kings of that, the things that work that way, the number one is the video poker, the 100 hands video poker, the multiline penny slots. These are the ultimate manifestation of those. Poker's like a deeper sense of control, where the sense of control is so deep that you feel in control, so well-designed. And that's a style of game that I never really ... That's what Josh is talking about when you look at like Facebook and Twitter. And they have elements of this, but not really like purposefully in a way that multiline slot machine does. But then there's the other kind, which is the kind that I made.

So if you put somebody in a highly variable, frequent, with hopefully a complex sense of control, some kind of interface between this variable outcome, frequent thing that you've designed. The brain actually just malfunctions. It doesn't know what to do. It gets trapped in a learning state and starts inventing ways out.

When I was a kid, I was a complete loser. I did really bad in school. Basically, didn't go to high school. Got out of high school and started working at Golfland, which is an arcade for like $3.25/hr. And this was 1998-ish. And I didn't have a PC. I'd never had a computer. I'd never been on the internet really, except for to check the weather at school, basically. Your average loser, basically, like a faceless, nameless loser that was going nowhere in life. Milpitas Golfland had a test run of this online racing game called San Francisco Rush, Alcatraz Edition. I had access to infinite tokens, and this thing was doing $500 a week tournament's on it. And I'd been good at video games my whole life. So I said, "I'm going to get good at this because I can make money doing this."

So I play the game like I don't know, sheesh playing the game, like 10 hours a day, something like that. I got to the point where I was gripping the steering wheel so much, it's still permanent, I still have it, is that my pinky, if I make a fist, my pinky doesn't come back up. It's stuck down because it was just permanent damage from playing this game.

And I got so good at it, that people were wanting to be my friend. I had people who drove up from LA just to meet me. I had rivals in the North Bay up in Sausalito, my enemies. And then there was these other guys in Sunnydale, they were like the trolls of the game. And there was this little community, and in my normal life, I was just literally falling asleep on boxes of soda syrup in the back of the arcade because there was just nobody there. It's a school day or whatever, and be raining outside.

But when I went on the game, I was the world's best. And I finally had some feeling of importance. And all I had to do was keep playing. So that's a pretty hard thing to turn off, especially when you're making $3.25/hr. And I ended up spending thousands of dollars on that game, that I could not afford. And I don't care. I would do it again in a heartbeat. It didn't bother me at all. It was so much fun to be in the mix in something in life. There's a tournament coming and I can win it. And there's a lot of people trying, that was really important to me.

So the games that I made are for that, that's a different mindset, Game of War and Mobile Strike. We made a lot of games. We made a lot of top-grossing games. I don't know, like 12. But they're all the same in a lot of ways. Those games were all purposefully very social, and volatile, and more about belonging to something, and being in the mix of something, than it was about spinning a wheel over, and over, and over, again. So that's a different aspect though.

And the addiction stuff works. You see it everywhere, it works. To me, it's just kind of boring because it's easy. It's not that hard to do. It's hard to do the sense of control really, really well. Ultimately it's pretty straightforward, but the social stuff is weirder. I'll give you an example.

Like one of my favorite things that I designed in the game, everybody would have clans. So there'd be clans, there'd be groups in the game, and people would join these groups of 50 people. And they'd get a little symbol, and a name, and all that stuff. Everybody's clan had a comment wall. And if I was in another clan, and I left a comment on your clan comment wall, it would be anonymous. And it would only be attributed to the clan that I was in, not the person. And the only way to figure out who left the comment was to kick the person who left the comment out of the clan. So what this did was, is people would infiltrate clans, go start trouble anonymously, to get two clans to fight with each other. And the clan owner of the person who's been infiltrated is having to purge his whole clan to try to figure out who the hell was sabotaging him. And the players would be like, "Why are they anonymous?" But it just created so much chaos. It sounds so simple, but it was like endless amounts of chaos. Just endless. It would trigger years of conflict, entertainment in a way that a spinning wheel with a stop button can't do. Does that make sense?

Patrick: [00:26:36] It makes a lot of sense. You said some of these things were not normal, but in some ways maybe they're more normal than anything.

Gabriel: [00:26:42] Well it's not a normal way to think about things.

Patrick: [00:26:44] Right. But it appeals to some base human instinct.

Gabriel: [00:26:47] It's like you sit down and you think, this page is loading too slow. And where's the notification tab? Do you know what I mean? That's normal way of thinking of software. This is like-

Patrick: [00:26:58] Diabolical.

Gabriel: [00:26:59] This is software that is engaging you in almost a metaphysical way. And it's using the tools to access something that you're not in control over. You didn't even know existed really. And it's hard to ... That little comment wall thing, if somebody would give me that answer, I'd hire them in a heartbeat. That's not a trivial design actually. That's actually as expert as they come.

You don't encounter things like that in the wild very often, because that was purposely built to create as much chaos as possible. And it actually took like a day to make, it was like a machine. It just constantly created things that we would never be able to predict. And that was what I was trying to do, is set up a scenario where crazy things, weird things, funny things could happen, and try to make them as interesting as possible, and just let everybody fill in the blanks.

Patrick: [00:27:57] Is there a second example of a mechanic like this, that could drive home this key point that you designed, or that you respect that somebody else designed?

Gabriel: [00:28:05] I'll give you an example. So in the game you have a hero that you use to manage your empire. If your empire gets destroyed, the person who destroys your empire takes your hero from you. You don't have him anymore. And he goes to jail essentially. And the person who captured, goes into his prison. And you actually can see it, your hero standing behind prison bars. It looks really funny, but he's there for like seven days basically. And then you get them back after seven days. Or if somebody destroys his city, all the heroes that are captured inside the city get released. So if I'm your friend and my hero gets destroyed, I'll call you and say, "Hey, help me. Help me, help me, help me get my hero back. And then you can get all your friends, go destroy that city and release my hero." But if you've captured my hero, you can pay money to force change the hero's name. So it's a name. You get to name it whatever you want. But if you've captured it, you can actually go in and pay. And then the name is changed. And in order to change it back, I have to pay to fix it.

Money makes the game like hyper-realistic. Hyper-realistic. It becomes more real than real in a lot of ways because now someone used money to force change my hero's name. And then I have to use money. It makes it so much more intense. And the money is actually the feature now. It's not even the name change, the money is the feature. There's a lot of humiliation built into it. And it's like building humiliation in the software. You couldn't get more counter-culture to what's going on on the internet right now. Like the internet is trying everything possible to get rid of all of this stuff, you can't even find memes anymore, basically.

Patrick: [00:29:45] What did you learn about the reasons why people will pay? Famously in free to play there's this crazy power law of who pays and how much. And the 0.1% of the players, I don't know what it is. Some crazy high percentage of the revenue. So maybe a better way of asking the question is like, what have you learned about what characterizes that willingness to spend?

Gabriel: [00:30:06] How I think about it is, if you go back, I think we're tribal people by nature. And when I say tribe, I don't just mean your culture. I also mean the size. Tribes tend to be pretty small. If you look at early America and people say, go West and land of opportunities. What does land of opportunity mean?

It means if I'm a blacksmith and I'm the only blacksmith around for 100 miles, it doesn't matter if I'm the world's best at making horseshoes or not. I'm the only one around. So, that's my land of opportunity. I could just keep going West essentially, and there'll be less and less people, and I'll have more and more of an opportunity to become important to the community that I'm in.

And we're in this age of hyper-competition, where planes, trains, internets. We have these social networks, and forums, and chat rooms, and clubhouses, and whatever, where we have essentially this real-time leaderboard of who matters and who doesn't. So when you say that 1% of spenders, that group is even smaller with who matters online.

So that's the answer, is that the world has become so competitive, soul-crushingly competitive. Where being good at something, it doesn't matter anymore, you have to be the best. Because if you make horseshoes, doesn't matter if you're not good at it, I'll just order it for someone else and it'll arrive in two days, FedEx. And you better be cheap, because if not I'll wait a week and get it from China.

So we're in this hyper state of competition, that makes people feel like they don't matter. Because they don't. They actually really don't, and everybody knows it. That's the honest truth. So you end up with these online communities, what you see are people...it's a seductive and simple way to belong to something, where these things actually reward time spent, rather than skill. So if I just spend more time, I'll be more important. So you see that a lot online. You see that a lot on social networking, they're all designed that way. Spend more time, you'll matter more. And that's got a lot of pull to it, because you see so much like online activism, for example. Online activism that you would never see in person because all I got to do is post something, or whatever. And they matter, or they'll get lots of likes, they'll get lots of retweets.

You get the culture and then the counterculture. And they're both essentially the same thing, like one side saying thing because that's the thing to say. The other side is saying the opposite because that's the opposite to say. And both sides get a lot of likes.

Video games give more structure to that than like Twitter does. A lot more structure. They could have levels, and Kings, and Queens, and weapons, and kingdoms, and whatever you want, you just make it up. So you get more structure. And the video games become a place to get lost in because they have so much structure. That's what I did. And I loved it. And for me it was really important to me, because before that I was just like, what's the point? I don't even know what the point of my life was basically. It's like, you're working at Target, and Dave & Buster's, and whatever, and you're not going to college, what else do you have? That's what I had. And I think that's what made me understand it. It's more of a reality thing. There's just too much competition, and people need environments to excel in. This whole hyper-globalization thing, it just crushes souls because they can't excel. And they know it. Everybody's like, robots are going to replace you. And AI is going to replace you, and you got to go eat bugs and go live in a box. It's so funny, I talked to these AI guys in Silicon Valley, so funny. They're all trying to make like God versions of themselves. They always say to the game developers, the go, "We need you." Because what are people going to do when my God AI thing works?

It's so sick. It really is sick, like they know what they're doing. They know exactly what was going to happen. And they're looking at the game designers like, well maybe you'll distract everybody. Maybe everybody will just be distracted as the whole world collapses around them. It's really funny. Like every person in AI, every single person in AI I've talked to, has said that to me, every single one. They're all, "We're going to need VR."

I wish they would be more honest in public about it. Because they all say it. I think that's what you're seeing. I think this game design worldwide takeover is partly because the innovators think that's what should happen. And also because they don't know what else to do. But I think it comes more from that. And I think if you start looking at people who are playing games or online all the time, or whatever, you'll see what I'm saying is true.

Patrick: [00:34:47] Can you say a little bit about the idea you've mentioned to me of heroic spending and the idea of group dynamics and willingness to spend? Not just in games but just generally speaking?

Gabriel: [00:34:58] This is really simple. I mean, this can be explained really easily. If you go to a restaurant, this is what I mean by gamefication, "so-called gamification". It's all very psychological. You're trying to reverse engineer yourself and then turn your internal reflexes into a feature. Basically if you go to a dinner and you're by yourself and the bill is like $2,000, how do you feel? horrible?

Patrick: [00:35:26] Horrible.

Gabriel: [00:35:27] Right? It's great. But if you go to a dinner and there's 20 people and it's $2,000, how do you feel?

Patrick: [00:35:31] Fantastic.

Gabriel: [00:35:32] It's not that bad actually. Right? Framing matters a lot. Christmas. Where does everybody spend their money? Like 70% of retail money spent on Christmas. That's for other people it's not for yourself.

So the ideal scenario for spending money is something where you personally get tremendous selfish benefit from it. Like it's a completely selfish purchase. It's just for you, really. You really just want it for yourself, but it also comes with this group benefit that everybody else gets and you get to feel really good and they get to thank you and praise you and say, oh, that's really awesome.

So like that dinner for 20 isn't necessarily the same thing, right? Because like, you may not want to feed everybody there. What the ideal would be like, there's something that you want at the dinner that costs $2,000. I don't know. It's like a golden ham or something. And it's like $2,000, but 20 people get to eat for free. The framing of that, it's I really wanted this ham thing, but now I'm feeding everybody and everybody's like, oh thank you. Right. But really what I did is I bought this thing for myself and these other 20 people got to eat for free, but you just don't tell them that part. Just let the guy enjoy his golden ham. And then everybody around to them thinking that he paid for dinner.

That's what I mean by heroic spending. It's like this combination of extreme, like selfishness and some kind of gift to the people around you. Like that's the ideal. And in the digital world, you can do that. And the real world that's actually hard to do because you're dealing with like physical objects. You're dealing with real things. In the digital world, there's no reason why you can't do that. Everything's fake. The key to video game economics design, which is really hard. And basically, nobody is good at it. Like there's like three people in the world that are good at it. The key to it is embracing the fact that it's all fake.

When I asked $1 million car thing, it's like, well, that's real. Like you get that. The video game is not real. That's why you hate it. Okay. Well, no, that's actually it's number one property is that it's not real. So if it's not real, you can do anything. If you've got limitations in your mind on what's okay and what's not okay, then you're just going to hamstring yourself with problems that the real world has, that the digital world doesn't have. So you can create any scenario you want. And it's really a matter of it's all an imagination problem. Everything's an imagination problem. Asking questions around, figuring out where our imagination breaks. And that's what I try to figure out. When I talk to game designers, where does their imagination break down? That's a problem. You should be able to approach any situation like, okay, what do I want? What can I make that gives all parties everything that they want? Because it's entirely imaginary. I should be able to. And you need to be able to do that.

When I talk to game designers, where does their imagination break down? That's a problem. You should be able to approach any situation like, okay, what do I want? What can I make that gives all parties everything that they want? Because it's entirely imaginary. I should be able to. And you need to be able to do that.

Patrick: [00:38:19] You mentioned features, the clan example, the anonymous forum posting clan example. Why is it so hard to design an economy? What is the skill set there that is important? What have you learned about that?

Gabriel: [00:38:32] So like, when I think about this stuff, I think about the Fed, the US Federal Reserve. In the world, there's only like 10 people on the other side of the table. There's like 8 billion people that take the money. And then there's 10 people that print it and they're not printing it to give you money. They're printing it because they want an outcome. They're designing an economy. You better believe it. They have goals in mind when they print money. When you take the money, you just think about it like your house, your car, your whatever. But they're thinking about like unemployment and productivity and they're moving money around the market to manipulate the market. To get unemployment down, to get productivity up.

You have to understand there's like a purpose to making money. It's not just there. It is manipulated. It's a whole reason for it. Money is economic manipulation. At least Fiat money is. That's all it is. It's designed to actually make you work. That's the whole purpose of it. So you're using something that's been designed to get you to work, to have constant inflation. The husband and the wife now have to work. The kids are working. Everybody and their mom is working to kind of increase productivity. So the money is designed to increase productivity and lower unemployment. It's not made to be money. It's an unemployment tool. It's a productivity tool. It's an innovation tool.

So when you make a game, it's the same thing. You have your virtual economy and it's there to do something. What is it there to do? And a lot of times people just think of it as you have products. They think of it like a normal kind of capitalist. I have an item and it costs this much and whatever. They don't really think about it in terms of what's the purpose of these currencies inside the game anyways? We're just making them up. What are they supposed to do?

So that's a pretty philosophical answer to your question. Not a very good direct answer. But there's not that many people that can wrap their head around doing both things at the same time. Making a currency that serves the game's needs and making the currency that serves a player's needs. They usually just think about it like the consumer side, not the printer side. That's hard, actually. That's really hard. It's hard to think about both. So there's not that many people that can do that. Where do you go to learn how to do that? It's a lot of just trial and error, and you have to have a point of view. You have to have a really strong point of view, and you have to be able to defend it. That's probably the biggest problem with game design in general is that, people have cool ideas, but they can't really defend them. It's honestly like they don't even know why they like them. It's just kind of cool. You have to be able to defend the stuff that you're coming up with, with logical outcomes. We may not be able to predict all the outcomes, but you should have a pretty good idea of what's going to happen after you do it. And not many people can do that. To be honest. They just make what they think is fun. And they don't really think about it in terms of a grander ecosystem and how everything fits together.

Patrick: [00:41:28] A lot of the revenue in this sphere has been cosmetic. You and I joked about what a single golden shotgun in Fortnite would cost or something, $100 million you think.

Gabriel: [00:41:38] If it was an NFT. Yeah. If it was an NFT, yeah. It'd be a $100 million. If they made a golden shotgun, one of one and gave it away in a raffle, it would sell for a $100 million.

Patrick: [00:41:48] Do you think that will continue as the primary source of revenue is cosmetic items in free to play games?

Gabriel: [00:41:53] That's a side effect of American games. You got to think about how games started and migrated around the world. American games were skill-based in the beginning. Eugene Jarvis, Defender. Robotron. That was what Americans thought. They think of it as a skill. And then the Japanese came around with stories. RPGs. And then the Koreans invented free to play. And they combined the Japanese style, but with a more kind of deeper economy because they needed to figure out how to make money off a free game. And then the Chinese adapted the Korean style and amped it up times 100.

If you look at Chinese games they are really different than American games. You often hear about Chinese apps that have a game design in them. You always hear this, "Everybody's got to go buy celery on the same day or whatever." And in America and the VCs are like, why can't that work here? And I keep doing that. I'm like, oh, why doesn't it work?

I'll tell you why it doesn't work here. It's very simple. The reason why it doesn't work here is because Americans, especially the developers, hate that stuff. They don't want to build it. They don't want to make it. They don't like it. They think it's manipulative. They do, at their core. That's how they feel. So when they see it, they see something going on in China and then they water it down until they feel good about it. And then it doesn't work. It happens over and over, and over again.

The whole skill, cosmetic, that's an American thing. Cosmetics, totally American thing. If you go to Japan, it's all treasure boxes, loot boxes. If you go to Korea, it's blue boxes plus item shops. And if you go to China, it's just straight item shops. Chinese way is kind of winning, to be honest. It's just winning because it's just so much more direct. They got games a lot later than everybody else. They got the Korean version of video games and that is better for the internet world. That fits better with the internet world. Whereas the Americans are kind of stuck with the arcade world, trying to make it work online. So you end up with cosmetics.

Patrick: [00:43:56] If you had to sum up what you've learned about human psychology from all of this design work, how would you sum it up?

Gabriel: [00:44:04] Players like the game more than you. They like the game way more than you. That's why I asked that question. Because if you don't like the game and they like the game more than you, then what the hell are you going to make? You're going to make something terrible. Most people who make the game don't like the game they're making. It's just a fact. They're usually kind of surprised with how fanatic the gamers are. They're actually kind of annoyed by it. Because they work on the same thing for years and they're like, "Oh God. These people are emailing me and spamming me." And you see gamer energy is super intense. And that energy is never matched in the dev studio. The dev studio is not as insane about the game as the players are.

So just software in general, and this is not just for games. It's just in general. Which is that you need to understand that the people who are interacting with your app, like it better than you do. So that's kind of like an out-of-body experience that's really hard to wrap your head around. You can never really wrap your head around it. You have to embrace the fact that they like it more than you do. And you need to play into that in a really heavy way. And that's pretty tough because you always have this cognitive dissonance going on around making things that you don't really like that they like. I think that's probably the number one...

And I think I've gotten pretty good at that over time. But I would say that's the number one thing that I've learned about making software, combining human psychology and software. Which is that I don't really understand everybody that's playing the game, and that's okay. But if I can recognize that and say, all right, I don't get it. They like it way more than I do. Let's see what they're doing and play into it rather than try to get them to like the things that I like. That's an instinct that's really hard to overcome.

And you see gamer energy is super intense. And that energy is never matched in the dev studio. The dev studio is not as insane about the game as the players are. So just software in general, and this is not just for games. It's just in general. Which is that you need to understand that the people who are interacting with your app, like it better than you do.

Gaming & Marketing
Patrick: [00:45:48] As you were building these games, you built an insane amount of technology infrastructure. I want to hear about that, and how that became an on-ramp into the world of some of the things you're interested in now, NFTs and crypto more generally speaking.

Gabriel: [00:46:03] Free to play and performance marketing have a lot of overlap. Direct marketing, a lot of overlap. A lot of the successful free to play companies were people who came from marketing, not video games. Because if they had to think about funnels and user acquisition, and that kind of stuff.

Free to play is really, really complicated. It's another reason why the video game industry at large kind of doesn't like it. Because it's just so much more complicated. I mean, it's like infinitely more. It's basically the hardest software that you can make. I don't think there's anything harder. You've got graphics and real time, and load times, and audio, and chat rooms, and service security, and service stability, and performance marketing, and live game management, and analytics. There's a reason the average game developer only last five years in the industry. Because it's ridiculously hard. It's way harder than anything.

You go work at Yelp or whatever. It's 1000 times easier and you get paid more. And you don't have a 99% chance of failure, which you do in the free to play world. It's probably higher than 99%. It really is on the cutting edge of a lot of technologies. But the combination of all of them is just near impossible. So kind of like a thankless business in a lot of ways. Where you have to do all this innovation. Try to build all the stuff and then nobody cares that you did it. And then it's a game at the end of the day. And then it just dies. It gets old and dies or it doesn't work. Machines only really try to kind of conquer all the different aspects. All of them, really. Really try to embrace it and try to conquer all the real-time aspects. Working on every phone, working in every language, marketing, running television in 62 countries, and buying every digital ad known to man.

Patrick: [00:47:45] Weren't you the biggest buyer of-

Gabriel: [00:47:47] Basically it got to the point where every single male outside of China saw an ad, two impressions of ours for three years straight, every day. We had about 400 people on the marketing team.

There hasn't been anything that's topped that yet in terms of direct marketing at scale. That was definitely the peak. And then a lot of it is kind of going away because of Facebook, Apple, and all the automation and privacy stuff that's happening. So you can't really replicate it. But it was really, really intense. So you have all this marketing going on. But by the way, that's all integrated in the game design too. When I was there, it was full integration of both of those things. They would actually interact with. The game economy would react to the stuff we were doing in marketing. And then you get into automation and AI and it gets really, really crazy. We did take it to new heights that I don't think have been, I don't know if you necessarily need to pass, but they haven't been passed since.

Future of NFTs
Patrick: [00:48:44] Can you say a bit about the experience with RT platform? Think some of the technologies that you built.

Gabriel: [00:48:49] My personal obsession has been trying to create the most amount of human interaction as possible on an app. Everything that I've done online has been an app about trying to get the whole world on one screen. That's my goal, is I want 8 billion people on the same screen at the same time. And then I want to just do crazy stuff with that. Because I think that's the perfect manifestation of the internet. It's like, put everybody on the same screen. We're all connected. So, let's all get on the same screen. So it sounds kind of crazy. But to me, it just seems like the logical outcome of the internet. Is we just all ended up on the same screen and looking at the same thing at the same time. And that's what I want to do, is try to create a real-time layer between everybody and make all that work very, very hard.

But the other thing that I think that's really interesting, kind of like change of topic, that you mentioned, I'm really excited about NFTs. Because I see a clear trajectory from in-app purchases to NFTs. Where we were the first game on the Apple platform to have in-app purchases in a game called Race or Die at the time. And then we made another game called Original Gangsters. That was the first one that we made for in-app purchases. It was transformative. It was insane. The idea that people can be in the app, they have their credit card hooked up, and they could just press a button, essentially. Put in their password, put their thumbprint, look at a camera and spend $1 to $100. Totally changed everything when that happened. I mean, our revenue went from selling apps. It went up about 700% overnight. As soon as we put in-app purchases in the game. So, it's crazy.

As a video game developer, the reason why that works is because I have a centralized economy. I have servers. I have server security. I have a total monopoly on my virtual goods. If you want to buy one, you can't buy it from anybody else. You have to buy it from me. And if you try to hack my server, you can't. You just have to buy it. There's no other way. We would make items, make new stuff for the game. And they would make millions of dollars in an hour. And the thing that enabled that ultimately, was all the security around the item. They had to buy it from me. And now we're seeing NFTs. Where, instead of the game developer creating the security around the item, we have Ethereum creating security around the items.

So, literally, everybody on earth now has the same monetization abilities that a video game has. And you're seeing the same results, like Blau doing $11 million of MP3s in a few hours. That's what video games do. So this guaranteed scarcity, guaranteed ownership, perfect security, or near-perfect security at least, around these virtual objects are the next iteration of the in-app purchase that will invade every single software business there is. Everybody's going to start looking like a gaming company. If you can get an audience together and you can create demand around the virtual object, you now have Ethereum as your security model and you can control whether somebody can buy it from you or not.

I see everyone, and it's sort of this thing that you can't avoid too because it's all margin. It's like a 100% profit. They're all virtual objects. So I actually see everybody getting into this. Even your local cafe. Everybody's going to be doing this because you can, and because it will make a lot of money. And it's going to come down to, going right back, this is what I meant. Last year I was feeling like, oh gosh. All this video game experience. I was applying it to some friends or whatever. There were some things I've worked on and it worked really well on. So I felt kind of good. It's okay. Works on other stuff. But when I saw this, I was like, oh my God. Is everybody going to be running a live ops team? And the answer is, yes. Everybody is. Everybody's going to say, get online at noon and buy 1 of 30 of these things that unlocks access to the VIP room, the events, the whatever, whatever.

And not only that it's superior to the in-app purchase because it's tradable and it's speculative. When people are buying stuff in a free to play game, the only thing they get in return is the experience. That's it. If they stop playing the game, that's it. They don't get anything. They just get nothing. But they get the experience and it's good enough. It's good enough to be $80 billion a year. Just for the experience. So what happens when these things are tradable and speculative, and guaranteed rare. I think it 10x's or maybe actually more. I think that people are vastly underestimating what's about to happen. They don't see it in their regular life. They don't work in businesses that do this kind of stuff.

So I think it's inevitable and it will happen slow and fast. Fast in a video game, but slow everywhere else. Because there's not enough people that understand this stuff. There really isn't. I mean, there are people who are okay at it. And then there are people who are really, really good at it. There's just not enough. And there's no school to go to either. It's all experience-based and intuition. So the world isn't going to turn into a video game overnight. Because there's just not enough people to do it. But I do think it is inevitable that everybody starts selling these virtual objects because they can. They can be designed in ways that unlock crazy amounts of profits that are just, I mean, this sounds really extreme but I think that you'll start seeing more and more businesses adopt loss-leader or free to play models. The price of coffee could go down because they make more money on the NFT. That sounds-

Patrick: [00:54:20] Crazy.

Gabriel: [00:54:21] Sounds crazy, but it's not. It's not at all. I read Travis Scott did a performance in Fortnite that generated $70 million. You can't do a concert anywhere in the world where you can generate $70 million. So, expect more of that and expect to keep ramping, and expect the numbers to look crazier and crazier. When Beeple sold his painting for whatever it was, $70 million or whatever it was. People said, oh, this is a fad. Real painting is worth more. No, it's not actually. The digital art's going to be worth more than the real painting. Because the digital art is instantly tradable. There's a liquid marketplace worldwide. I don't have to pack it or worry about it getting damaged. The digital art, that got some technical problems solved. But the digital art will never be damaged a 1000 years from now. Think about that. The Mona Lisa needs an army around it, literally, to protect it. The liquidity, the guaranteed longevity, the guaranteed scarcity. It's inevitable that these things become the world's most valuable objects. And I think it's inevitable that every business starts selling them. I also believe that NFTs that connect to centralized services will be where all the money's at. Maybe not worth the most in dollar terms like a Beeple is, but definitely where all the revenue's generated. Because I can take my centralized service and reorganize it around that NFT to change the value of the NFT.

Patrick: [00:55:50] What does a centralized service mean here?

Gabriel: [00:55:52] Gary Vee is doing this. So Gary Vee's got his NFTs and he has his Vee coins where he says, if you buy this NFT, you get to go to 10 of my conferences and I'll do an hour on Zoom call. There's nothing stopping him next year from taking that same NFT and saying, oh, actually, I'm going to have that NFT unlock 20 conferences. And not 1 hour Zoom calls, but 10 hour Zoom calls. So does the value of the NFT go up? Yes. So is Gary Vee really just managing an NFT index at that point? Yes. So I think you'll see these kinds of businesses, same way like free to play, organizing themselves around user acquisition, and then managing their virtual goods the same way a game company does to try to make them as attractive as possible by carving up their businesses and slicing them up in a way where it makes the NFTs attractive.

Patrick: [00:56:45] So it's almost like we're going to see a digital manufacturing boom. Would be one way to think about this.

Gabriel: [00:56:50] I think of Ethereum as the world's factory. And maybe Ethereum doesn't win but, looks like it will. But I see it as the first time, it's a virtual factory and it makes virtual objects that I can own and sell. So, everybody has access to this factory. And the only thing that stops you from making something interesting is your imagination.

So you'll have 8 billion people manufacturing NFTs. Some of them are going to change people's lives. They're going to be amazing. Most of them will be worthless because you can make trillions, infinite number of them. But everyone's going to have a shot at creating digital scarcity, like the gaming companies do. And you're going to see more and more Blau-like scenarios. Where he sells his 2-year-old album for $11 million with the NFTs and the stuff that he did. Which was brilliant.

But that's actually going to be common. I was joking about this. They always say the Americans, they do that. What do kids want to be when they grow up? Do they want to be influencers? In the United States it's like the number one job. I want to be a YouTuber. And in China it's an astronaut. And they always go, "oh this is the fall of the Western civilization."

It's like, wait a minute. Who the hell wants to be an astronaut? First of all, astronauts are old. Astronauts are kind of ugly. And they have to go to school for a million years, and only four of them go into outer space. It doesn't make any sense. Why would anyone want to be an astronaut? And then you look at the influencer guy. Thousands of millionaires. They go to all the best parties. They're 19 years old. And pretty soon they're going to be billionaires because they're selling NFTs. And that's just reality.

And I don't know if you like that or not, but the internet enables that. I can get a big audience. I can make digital scarce goods, and I can sell them to you. And you can maybe even profit off of them. Because they're speculative and they could go up in value. And if I'm good at managing what I put out there, they will go up in value. I say this. I believe it, but I think we're going to see hundreds of social media billionaires in the next 10 years. Anybody like gen X and higher is going to be vomiting, disgusted. They're going to want to jump off a bridge basically because they can't believe that these idiots doing dances on TikTok are making $100 million a year. But they're a business with customers and they have products to sell to them. So it's only logical.

So in a lot of ways, it's like the people who want to be astronauts. It's like, hey, get with the times man. That was the 1960s. That's not where we're going. We're not going to outer space. We're going to NFT, TikTok world. I would make a judgment and say, that's not necessarily a good thing, but it doesn't mean it's not true. It's totally true. So I'm really excited about it because I think it's going to fundamentally change everything. Digital goods. The idea that any business can sell speculative or rare digital goods is going to fundamentally change almost every business. And it's a good time to be a game designer, I guess now, finally. 

 

Source: NFTs and a Thousand True Fans

Patrick: [00:59:59] So what does it mean if you're right and we're going towards this massive called NFT manufacturing boom, and every business starts over some time horizon incorporating this as part of their business model. What does that mean people should do now? There's not that many ETH holders, the universe of potential buyers.

Gabriel: [01:00:15] NFTs have broken away from crypto. It's more like a file format. It's like an MP3 to the average person. They just think of it like, "Oh, it's an NFT."

Patrick: [01:00:23] Something to buy. Yeah.

Gabriel: [01:00:24] No, it's a file. NFT is like a concept, but to them it's a file format. I don't know if it's going to go this direction, but I think you could see like a Disney chain and a Universal chain. They'll just roll their own NFT platforms because there's just no need, people don't care whether it's Ethereum or not. Top Shot kind of proves that. I'm not sure it's a crypto product. It's more about... Crypto blockchains or distributed ledgers can enable this stuff.

Patrick: [01:00:51] It'll disappear. It's the guts. Yeah.

Gabriel: [01:00:53] Yeah. In the mind of the consumer, it's just a rare ownable digital object. I think Ethereum will matter, but I'm not 100% sure that it will matter. I'm not 100% sure.

Patrick: [01:01:04] Give me one more thing at least. One more what I would call purple pill. Something not too inflammatory. Something you think that is true about the world that people wouldn't like to hear.

Gabriel: [01:01:14] I think we need AI more than we think. I think that we're at an IQ limit and the reason why innovation feels like it's slowing down is because we can't do it. We just literally, physically can't do it. And there may be an exit ramp through AI, but it's not exactly clear that we can do that either.

I really think that the 60s and 70s futurism is the reason why we're suffering so much today. Because there was no reason to not print money, to not full-on inflationary mindset and everything because we were going to live in paradise. We were going to be on the moon. We'll be able to pay all this back, there's no problem. And then financialization happened, and gamification of financialization happened because that was easier and it worked. But it's not better. Innovation is better. It's clearly better. If I make a teleport machine, I don't need to make a video game, I don't need to have levels and achievements. It doesn't need to look nice. It doesn't need any of those things. It's just is what it is and everybody wants one. That is better. That's the only way to really have prosperity. And this design/now gamification is a symptom of the limits of our minds. So instead of doing things in the physical world, we're doing things in the psychological world now, and that's may be permanent. And I hope that's not true, but more and more of the economy is going into this exploit, automation, high-frequency trading, that kind of thinking. And it's not rockets to Mars.

We've gotten to the point where we look at the two richest men... Like we used to have the Wright brothers, these two guys trying to make an airplane, they're in the middle of nowhere, who are these guys like? Now we look to the two richest men in the world to solve our most difficult problems. The regular person has no chance in participating in the future of the economy now. The only people who have the chance like, "I hope Bill Gates figures out solar panels." And the regular people are just kind of looking up to them saying, "Well, I don't know what to do." And I think the reality is the rich guys don't know what to do either. We got the rockets going. Those are cool. And we're making some incremental innovations. There's been some really important things like crypto. So it's not hopeless. It's just not what we thought was going to happen. So I think that's the dislocation between the economy and the reality of innovation is that the economy moved way ahead of innovation, under false expectations that we would be able to keep innovating at an exponential rate.

I think there's a fear that we know that we can't. So then you're staring at deflation like a reset, essentially. We've got too much of everything and there's not enough innovation to pay this back. It doesn't exist so we got to abandoned ship basically. That's pretty bad. But from my lens, from my point of view, it's like that's why gaming is becoming so important. It's because we don't have the teleport machine and we need one. And if we had teleport machines, nobody would be playing games.

Patrick: [01:04:31] What do you intend to do, assuming you're right that this game design and gamification skillset becomes increasingly valuable in the next couple of decades. You've developed it, what are you going to do with it?

Gabriel: [01:04:42] There is opportunity for somebody like myself to really express these skills across broader things that people don't expect. And NFTs are going to kind of be the foundation for that I think. I'm really interested in investing and thinking about companies around that space because I think that it's going to be in everything, just because I have to. I mean, once again, once somebody else starts making more money than you, because they're doing it, like you have to do it too. So it's just inevitable. It's just going to take over everything. So I think there's a real opportunity for me to have some leadership in that space.

I have an idea for video game again, the next place where all this stuff is going. So we've put together a team for something like that. But yeah, I think there's a chance for...when game designers actually do enter the NFT space, you'll know, because they'll just wipe the floor with all this stuff. Like right now this stuff just looks like eBay. We have this entire digital economy and we're making eBay. Just super boring. It's not interesting. So game designers will definitely take over the space. That's for sure. Zero doubt in my mind.

Investing in Broken Spaces
Patrick: [01:05:40] Does the idea, I'll call it the gooey teleportation principle or something, is this also an investing principle? You should look for stuff that has terrible design or is breaking?

Gabriel: [01:05:50] NFTs are important the same way the App Store was important. Meaning that at the beginning of the App Store, everything was broken. It took like three months to get an app approved. Just crazy stuff. It was a real nightmare. And it was growing like crazy. That's what you want. You want environment that's completely broken. There's like a couple spaces still in the innovation phase and crypto is clearly one of them.

You always hear these VCs who don't know what they're talking about. They go, "You know what crypto needs, it needs a good UI." I'm like, "Oh my God, just stop. Like stop it." It's innovative, it doesn't need that. It's still growing despite that. If we get to the phase where all crypto can do is add UI, it's over. That's it. Right? Then it's just a matter of who's got more DAU at that point, and it's over, right?

So crypto is a good example of something that's still really deep in the innovation phase. It's not everything, but crypto will eventually turn into a game too. It's obvious. It's kind of got elements like that. But my favorite stuff is you go to the websites, they look terrible. You ever noticed that? If you look at this DeFi projects, it's like the worst looking website you've ever seen. That's a good thing. That's what I want. I want it to look terrible like it's crashing all the time, and it's just growing. That's the sign. Because when you clean it up, when you do put the good UI in, and you do gamify it, it will be 100x bigger. If you're 10 years deep and still looks terrible and still growing like crazy, that's all you need to know.

VC is right that when it does get cleaned up, it's going to be bigger. But that's not what you're looking for. You're actually looking for it being a mess and it's still growing. There's a lot of examples of this, but I look at it for like working but broken. It's growing like crazy, but it's completely broken. That's where entrepreneurs-

Patrick: [01:07:34] Put all your money there.

Gabriel: [01:07:35] Put all your money. Anything that's just growing like crazy and totally broken, just put all your money there because obviously when it gets fixed, it's going to be better. And there are tons of examples of this. There's like the MySpace/Facebook example, right? They both had the broken but working thing, but MySpace couldn't fix itself fast enough. So that's kind of the bet. But if I didn't know the future, I'd go, "Yeah, put all your money in MySpace." Right? I mean it's growing and it's like totally broken all the time. That's where I would look at the risk. I think you kind of have to be an entrepreneur to even understand that. But that's how I look at it, where's the space that's just totally screwed up and it's still working? That's what you want to be involved in.

Chinese Gaming Style
Patrick: [01:08:11] Do you think that the characteristics you mentioned of American versus Japanese versus Korean versus Chinese, what works in games, item boxes versus cosmetics? Will that translate into the NFT economy world too?

Gabriel: [01:08:26] Chinese are taking over video games for a reason. Genshin Impact, that's the biggest game right now, it's Chinese. They're more adept to the internet age. They don't have the arcade world dragging them down. They don't have any. They don't Street Fighter. It all comes down to Street Fighter plaguing the West, every game has to be about practice and competition and high scores and stuff like that. The Chinese games don't have this problem. They don't think that way. I think that the Chinese style takes over the world.

Patrick: [01:08:56] Can you just define that style? Because we didn't do it when you said item box. Say a little bit more about what that means if that's going to be the thing that takes over.

Gabriel: [01:09:03] One example is they were the ones that really pushed getting walking out of 3D MMOs, automatic walks that you don't have to play. And if you think about it, it's like what's walking in a game for other than to waste your time. But in the West, it's like, "No, it's the experience." And then over there it's like, "What are you talking? I just want to level up and play the game." That kind of mindset is more successful, that's in more people essentially. It's a more cut the crap, very, very focused. And you lose a lot of the art and the feel that Western games bring, but it's easier to add that mindset to their mindset than vice versa.

From the economy side, they're much more... Chinese MMO, for example, like much more emotional. Like the comment wall thing, that's more of like, I don't think I've ever seen it. I've never seen that in another game but that fits more how they think about things. Chinese have a very specific style that there's only parts of it that don't work in the West. Very small parts. Everything else works except for like... they have item shops with like millions of items that cost like a penny. When people buy stuff, they want to feel like they got a lot of stuff. You don't really need to do that in the West. And the other thing that they do that you can't do over here is they're very punitive, extremely punitive. Meaning you'll have a sword and you'll have to put five stars in the sword. Okay. And each time you put a star in the sword, there's a higher chance that the sword blows up and you lose it. Players will end up spending $10,000 on swords that break. And they finally get the one that doesn't blow up, and then everybody's like, "Whoa, he has five stars, that's crazy." That won't work in the United States. And I can just say that and you know it. I just say it and everybody listening to me knows that will not work here, because you feel like, "No, I'm not going to stand for that. Spending money for something that just breaks randomly." You probably rigged it so I have to keep spending. That's what we think. That's an example of something that could work in China that doesn't work. But almost everything else translates perfectly. And to be critical, there hasn't been a lot of real, in my opinion, Chinese game design style really peaked around 2012. They haven't really done anything new since. So free to play kind of like ran out of ideas really around like 2012. So there hasn't been a lot of new stuff from anybody. But in general, their design pattern just works better.

Kindest Act
Patrick: [01:11:25] I ask everybody the same closing question. What was the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Gabriel: [01:11:30] Oh my gosh, that's easy. Well look, I'm married. I wanted to stick to career. I wanted to stick to a career, but you have to bring in the wife and the family and all that. But in my professional life, it would be Aaron Hightower, the guy who... I was just a tester who kept getting fired because I was annoying. Thought he knew everything. And this guy kept going to new places and kept hiring me over and over and over and over again, until he got fired or laid off from every place so I just had to start my own thing. It's the real reason you start a company is because nobody will hire you.

And then you've got to convince all the VCs you're likable afterward. That's the challenge. No one will hire me, but I'm likable. Without him, I wouldn't be where I am today. So I like to try to do the same for younger kids. But that guy really changed my life. And he didn't need to, he just did it. So that was the nicest thing, taking an unemployable guy and just kept giving him a job. That's a really great thing.

Patrick: [01:12:31] When you first talked, you almost instantly rewired my brain, which is kind of what I'm searching for in all of these conversations. Someone to just rip something, view of the world up. And this idea of design as being the end not the beginning of an innovation in some space.

Gabriel: [01:12:47] Well, look at the iPhone.

Patrick: [01:12:48] Yeah, won't forget. Yeah, just incrementally better, right?

Gabriel: [01:12:51] Once your business goes in the design phase, you need to really look around and start wondering, do you have the right people there to come up with the next thing? You may not.

Patrick: [01:12:59] It's a lesson I won't forget. And I've really enjoyed our conversations. They've opened my mind and expanded my mind. So thank you so much for the time.

Created by @_Nick_Diller

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
