
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released May 19th, 2021
Founder's Field Guide
Peter Reinhardt - Learning How to Sell
Peter Reinhardt is the co-founder and CEO of Segment, a market-leading customer data platform. We cover the lessons Peter has learned throughout his journey running Segment, why revenue operations is an underrated aspect of any business, and the current data use trends.

00:00:00
01:02:26
Introduction
Patrick: [00:02:14] My guest today is Peter Reinhardt, co-founder, and CEO of Segment, the market-leading customer data platform that was acquired by Twilio last year. In our conversation, we cover the fascinating journey of Segment from an education feedback tool to the business it is today. Peter's sales philosophy on meeting the customer where they are and not where you think they should be and why revenue operations or rev ops is underrated for any business. This was an incredibly honest conversation on company building that any builder can learn from. Please enjoy my conversation with Peter Reinhardt.

The Universal Customer Data Pipe
Patrick: [00:02:47] So, Peter, I think we need to start at the end. I'm a data person by background, so I don't want to get too far off the deep end here before we orient the audience in what Segment does today, and then we'll probably rewind all the way to the beginning because the journey has been so unique and interesting in your case. Can you begin by describing what Segment does for its customers today in 2021?

Peter: [00:03:09] Yeah, so we help companies collect and manage all of their first-party customer data. So all the interactions that they have with their customers on their mobile applications, their websites, their help desks, their payment systems, all those things. All that data they float into Segment where we assemble this holistic record of their customer interactions and then we're like the pipes and they sort of move that data out to all the different marketing, sales, support tools where they actually then make use of that data to interact better with their customers.

Patrick: [00:03:38] Can you say what existed or how this function was handled prior to Segment? Presumably, you made life easier for people that are generating first-party data, want to do something else with it. They probably were still doing something else with it before. What did it look like before Segment came along?

Peter: [00:03:53] Before us and frankly, still most of the market today, goes and builds this in-house. So, they've got engineers who get assigned to requests from the marketing team to go integrate the newest ad campaign pixel into the website bespoke usually API directly alongside the other 20 or 30 marketing pixels that they've got going on. Pull data out of this Stripe API or rather the Salesforce API and load it into our data warehouse. Lots and lots of bespoke engineering going on to build each one of these pipes independently and what we stumbled on is that there was a relatively clean API to be built that would act as one giant pipe for all that stuff.

Patrick: [00:04:31] Could you give a simple example of maybe just one of those data workflows just to put some flesh around the concept of how a normal company might care about a data pipeline like this, just like a simple example?

Peter: [00:04:43] A small company that's just getting started, often, the first thing they'll do when they launch their website is they'll put Google Analytics on the page. And so that's copy-pasting a snippet, adding Google tags to the tracking code around the website or they start getting a sense of like how many people are coming and viewing the page, how many people are clicking through my e-commerce flow? And then they start to notice that, hey, not everyone is actually going all the way through my checkout flow. So I'd love to be able to send them an email. Okay, well now I need to get that same data about people moving around the webpage into my Google Marketing tool so that I can send emails to the people who started but didn't complete the checkout flow. I actually also want to send blast emails once a month to my customers announcing my new product launch. So, okay, now I need a different email marketing tool that'll allow me to send these batches. Oops, I need to get that same email data and tracking data into the other email marketing tool.

Then as the company gets a little bigger, they're like, now I actually, I really want an analyst, that can sit down and run arbitrary simple queries and build beautiful visualizations of how people are interacting with my site, what products they're using, all these things. And oops, now I need that same data in a data warehouse. Over time, the rat's nest of all these data pipelines multiples as companies become more complex and want to make use of data in more and more places.

Patrick: [00:05:56] So, if we think about Segment as the universal pipe, if you will, from information about customers that's digital and getting that to the right places for analytics or product improvement or whatever they want to do with that data. What is the insight that makes, you said it's unique that it's the universal structure for that pipe versus having to rebuild it each time you have some workflow like this, say a bit about that maybe technically or in terms of the product, like what was that insight, flesh that out for us a bit more.

Peter: [00:06:23] I think it was getting the abstraction layer of the API and credit for this goes to my co-founder, Ian. There's a really, actually awesome paper by the author of the R programming language. It's called Tidy Data, which is the name of the paper and he basically explains what it is that makes data in this concept tidy. Basically, what it boils down to is a long table of observations of a thing at a time and that has a bunch of nice properties to it and you can aggregate all kinds of things on top of that but you really want to start with data that is things like user A did X at time Y. Once you start with that, you can reassemble the current state of the user, you can reassemble all these other things.

We discovered that same thing by accident, I think with our API, which is very simple. So the API for collecting all this data, you can say, well, there are so many different tools. You're going to need such a complex API to support all this different explosion or advertising tools and email marketing tools and analytics and data warehouses and so on and so on. But in reality, you actually only need basically two API methods. One is the identified call, which is who is the customer? And the other is the track call, which is an observation that user X did Y at time Z, that's it. That is the entire API. We have since added a little bit to that but that simplification down to this abstraction of these two API methods, I think has allowed it to be a single pipeline and what allowed a lot of engineers to look at it and say "whoa, that is an elegant solution to this massive spaghetti code that I've been writing."

Patrick: [00:07:53] What given that simple, elegant architecture of that concept makes it hard for others to build their own version of a universal pipe. So if I was a huge organization and I had 200 of these workflows, why wouldn't I just dedicate some engineering resources to build a Segment clone and manage it in-house?

Peter: [00:08:12] Many have tried. It turns out that there is devils underneath in the details, specifically in a few different places. One is how do you translate those two API calls, simple abstraction. How do you translate that then to how the data should show up in Google Analytics? We have been building our Google Analytics integration and refining it for almost a decade now. And it shocks me that we still find aspects of that integration that still needs to be better. I guarantee you that when you have 20,000 customers using an integration and they're still finding things that can be improved about it, there's this depth within the quality that any one of these integrations needs to have and then we've got hundreds of them. So if you think about as a company, "Oh, I'll just go build this myself." That is a giant target of time that you can waste going and rebuilding these integrations that are already super high quality.

So that's one, the other is it turns out data deliverability is no joke. So, okay, great. You've got the data refined in. Sure. You send it off to the downstream provider. But what if that provider has downtime? This happens all the time. It's not like a what-if scenario. It's like we've got 300 partners. I guarantee at least one of them is down right now or having significant deliverability issues. So how then do you view that data and then redeliver it at a time when the API is up. We have a cool status page. That's segment.com where you can actually see the deliverability to all of those partners in real-time. And there's substantial losses along the way that we patch over by redelivering the data when they're out or when they're ready to accept it.

So there's probably a hundred things in this realm of just, "Yeah, sure. You can do it. It'll be okay." It won't ever be done high-quality unless you are amortizing all of this R&D over thousands of customers and is a huge maintenance burden. So all of these integrations change their APIs. They change how they want to accept. They change what features they have. They want some new things, they need new types of data. So that is just a huge workload to keep up with as well.

Origins of Segment
Patrick: [00:10:05] I want to rewind time. Then there's a million other things I'll ask about the current state of the business and customers and everything that you've learned but your story to get to here is quite winding and interesting, especially in terms of how Segment began. I think it would be surprising to people to hear what the business did at the beginning, given everything you just described. Can you bring us back to the earliest days or day one, day zero? What you and your co-founders set out to do and the lesson you learned in finding or building a product that the market actually wanted?

Peter: [00:10:33] In 2011, I was studying aerospace engineering at MIT. My two co-founders Llya and Calvin were studying computer science at MIT. And of course, the co-founder was studying design at Rhode Island School of Design. And naturally, we were really excited about things to help students. The idea that we had and that we applied to Y Combinator and that we got into the program in 2011, was a classroom lecture tool where students could push a button to say, "I'm confused." And the professor would see this graph about how confused their students were. And we had talked to some professors who seem to be excited about it, including Professor Morris at MIT, who's also on the YC committee. And we built a little product that people could do this thing. It turns out that this is an incredibly distracting thing to put into the classroom. Basically, as soon as you put this in front of a student, they go straight to Facebook and they go straight to Twitter, they go everywhere except focusing on the lecture. By having a thing where the professors went and said, "Everyone, please get out of your laptops. And open up..." It was called ClassMetric. "Open up ClassMetric. And we'll use it as a way to engage better during the lecture." Total disaster. I remember standing in the back of this one classroom at Boston University, I think it was anthropology class. And we started counting screens, just standing in the back, what are people doing? How many of them are actually using our tool? I think at the beginning of the class 60% of the students were not using ClassMetric at any given time. Then by the end, it was about 80% were not using ClassMetric.

It was basically the most horrible thing you could ever put into the classroom. Pretty quickly realized that that was not going to work but we'd raised $600,000 at a demo day on the back of professors trying it out in the fall. And so we called back all the investors that we had raised money from a few weeks prior and said, "Hey, we just tried this in the classroom. It was a disaster. We should do something else. What do you want us to do with the money?" All of them said, well all of them except a couple said, "We invested for the team so go find something else." And then there were two that we paid back.

Patrick: [00:12:29] This is a fascinating transition from a classroom piece of software to something very, very different. Describe that bridge. You've talked to me before about the difference between, it's a good excuse to talk about it, founders with a vision of the future versus founders that recognize something the world technological machines wants or needs. So talk us through that concept and how that applies to switching from a classroom software to what Segment became.

Peter: [00:12:55] We were very excited about the classroom lecture tool because we thought that it was the way that the world should work. We were like, "Hey, you should be able to give feedback on a lecture and a professor should go and improve their lecture. And people should care about how good these things are. And this should be a great way to go get all of this learning and maybe it'll extract it and build it into some massive online research or learning opportunity." But yeah, the world just doesn't really care how you think it should work. It just doesn't. The world has its own problems. And we actually made this mistake again after CassMetric failed, which is... We were like, "Hey, we should have been able to look in our analytics and see that the students were distracted." And so they then spent a year trying to build an analytics tool to compete with Mixpanel and Google Analytics or any of the players in that space. That was also a disaster. Because again, we'd have this mentality that we knew it was right and we knew how it should work. And we're going to go build that. Maybe later in life, you've already seen enough that you can have an opinion like that but certainly for some college kids, not a good strategy. And I think about a year and a half later, we were basically realizing that our analytics tool was also failing. So we're a year and a half in and basically failed at everything. We've got a $100,000, the rest is in the bank of the $600,000 that we've raised. We realized that we have about four to six months of runway left.

So that was pretty intense when we realized we got one more shot on goal. And so we had a big discussion over a couple of days and it ended with a huge fight where my co-founder Ian had this idea that we had built an open-source library a bit over a year before that for our own use which was just to take data from our website and send it through to these analytics tools. And so on downstream, it's called analytics.js. He was like, "Yeah I think that little analytics data abstraction could be a really big business." And I was like, "That is the worst idea I've ever heard. There is 300 or 500 lines of JavaScript, it's already open-source. I don't understand the business opportunity here." And so we got in a huge fight about this and I went home and I was racking my brain. How do I kill this thing? This is terrible. I finally figured it out, came in the next day. And I was like, "All right, guys, here's we're going to do. We all trust Hacker News. Hacker News is full of developers, it's clearly a developer product. Let's build a beautiful landing page. We'll put it up on Hacker News and we'll see what happens." I was like done, dead. And so we built the landing page and put it up on Hacker News and went straight to the top, got a few hundred upvotes on Hacker News, sat at number one for most of the day, got a few thousand stars on GitHub, got thousands of email signups. People were reaching out to us on these backchannels like LinkedIn demanding access to a hosted version of this library. The whole thing basically blew up in a good way in 24 hours.

And I was very one, excited but two, self-confidence or self-worth or a judgment. It was just like I've been wrong three times now. I had two ideas, they were wrong. But I thought they were good and the world told me they were wrong. And then this one that I thought was right, they won't tell me the opposite. I was so baffled. It took me a month and a half to recover from that as we started getting more attraction with the library. But yeah, the real learning for me was the world could not give a shit how you think it should operate. It really has problems that it wants solved. If you go and humbly solve those problems, it rewards you. And if you try to tell them how it should be done you'll just get your butt kicked.

But yeah, the real learning for me was the world could not give a shit how you think it should operate. It really has problems that it wants solved. If you go and humbly solve those problems, it rewards you. And if you try to tell them how it should be done you'll just get your butt kicked.

Patrick: [00:16:17] How broad do you think that observation is? Do you think that describes... I love Kevin Kelly's idea of the technium. I think you're the one that turned me on to his book, What Technology Wants, where it's this independent thing that has needs, and like you just described, if you serve its needs, great things will happen but you probably can't change the whole technium. Do you think that that describes most successful technology businesses versus this romantic notion of a visionary founder that wants to change how everything is?

Peter: [00:16:44] I think it describes most B2B businesses. And I'm the last person on earth that you should ask about B2C. I'm self-admitted deep nerd. In B2B we're under contract to solve a business problem. I think in B2B, it's pretty cut and dry. B2C might be different. The Steve Jobs of the worlds may be attracted to that market where maybe there's a little more room for that creative, here's what you should want.

Patrick: [00:17:06] Say a bit more about... So you had the Hacker News experience. So obviously there's interest in the problem space even though it's 500 lines of code open-source already. Describe more of what that felt like in the early days you realize you were wrong. I'm sure there were more data points that started coming that said, okay, we might be onto something. This is a product-market fit question for those that might be operating in the similar, give the B2B machine what it wants versus try to change the world. Just say more about what that felt like or what the data points were. What were some of the early signs that were continued to validate that?

Peter: [00:17:39] I would say it was very explosive interest. And I think the same is true of a lot of other B2B companies and their founding stories. Dropbox, another great example. They blew up on Reddit. I think the feeling, it was like every metric was going haywire. We'd had a trickle of 10 visitors per day or whatever to our website before that and for our analytics tool. And then all of a sudden it was tons of people are submitting issues, tweeting about it, on Hacker News, emailing us, LinkedIn-ing us, just everything. People were just trying to get the thing. Part of it actually felt like a loss of control. We were going from this mindset of, hey, we know what's right. Actually, we don't know what's right. People are going to tell us what's right. And there was this big letting go of, whoa, this thing is going to move on its own. We'll try to clear the ground in front of it but this was going to go. And that loss of control that actually we're handing the roadmap in many ways to our customers and their needs was a big adjustment for us. We over-corrected on it actually, because we were like, this is new and it's really working. And so let's lean into that mentality. And so for six months, until we fundraised again, we literally just said we are not going to drop a vision. We have discovered this open-source library that seems to solve people's problems. We're going to spend the next six months just trying to solve their adjacent problems. We're not going to drop what we think this could be in the future. We build tons of adjacencies. We actually killed a lot of those initial directions because we knew how to build at that point as a team. And so we build stuff and killed stuff again and again and again and again.

And then after six months, we looked back at what we had built and what was working, what wasn't, and what people had wanted was more integrations, more destinations to send data. They wanted more sources, more places to pull data from. And that was pretty much it. And so we started to get a sense though, that it was all centric on customer data. And we started to get a sense that that problem was actually pretty deep. And so after six months of exposure to just solving adjacent problems and solving those requests and getting more contact with customers then we started to write down what the vision might be. That like, hey, maybe we could back our way into being the customer record that a business has internally.

Patrick: [00:19:50] What was the most challenging thing you and the team faced? So if we call that first chapter, maybe through that six month period, the early product chapter or something, whatever you want to call that next chapter early building this into a proper business and scaling the team, et cetera, scaling the product. What was the most challenging part of that second chapter of Segment?

Peter: [00:20:11] Maybe I'll actually add one thing also, which is the most challenging aspect of the first chapter. I think was actually keeping the team together. I think most teams actually would have split in that first chapter. It was a year and a half of misery. I ended that year and a half with going to the hospital multiple times for panic attacks. I lost 10 pounds in two weeks. By any health measure, we were not doing well. And we were fighting. It was bad but ultimately what kept us together was that we'd been roommates for a long time. We were great friends for years beforehand. We were not particularly interested in working anywhere else, at the end of the day we knew that we wanted to work with each other. The idea mattered less than the people around the table. And I suspect that many other companies die without that, going through the same struggles but they just die and split up before they maybe get to their breakthrough, if you will. So, that was the first big challenge.

The second challenge after we had product-market fit and it was obvious that this was a thing and people were adopting it. We had just a very steady growth curve despite not really marketing beyond the launch on Hacker News and a few blog posts here and there. The real challenge became sales and that's because we were all college students. We've never been exposed to how companies operated before. We'd certainly never sold anything in our life aside from equity in the company. And we were really scared to ask for money. We sent out this apologetic email to the top 15 customers or something by volume. And we basically said, "Hey, we're thinking we need to raise the price to about $15/month. Would that be okay with you?" And bless his heart. This guy Edwardo from Brazil wrote back and he said, "Guys, this price is so low that I may have to stop using your product because there is no way you're going to be around in a year. So don't charge me more but you better raise your price." And that was obviously a wake up call. And then we got a sales advisor. I'll never forget the first sales meeting that I had with him, the sales meetings with Nat who was the CEO of Xamarin. Now CEO of GitHub. They were insisting using us on the pre-plant and everything. Walking over to the sales meeting in the financial district in San Francisco with Mitch. Mitch stops and says, "Peter, in this meeting, you need to ask for $120,000 contract." And I was like, "Mitch, that is 1000 times more expensive than our public price listing. I don't know what you're smoking. I cannot go in and ask for a 1000x price increase." And he's like, "Well, then I quit as your sales advisor." It was literally our first thing. And I was like, "Okay, I'll ask for $120,000." So we go into this. He's like, just trust me. That's the base rate for any enterprise contract which in retrospect is true. As we go into this thing. And then Nat's like, "Okay, well what's the price?" And I was like, well, and I turned beet red. I was like, "Nat the price is $120,000." And I was not believable in any fashion. And he looks at me and is like, "How about $12K a year?" And I was like, "How about $18?" So he agrees to $18K and became our first contract, I think or the second contract once we finally got around to signing. So he was victorious. He saved 85%. I was completely mind-blown because here we were charging 150x, literally 150x. That was a second big awakening moment for me. That the value that we were attaching in our minds was on a cost basis rather than a value basis. And then we had no understanding of the value that we were actually providing to customers but in B2B sales, value is what you should sell on and value is what matters to the customer. They couldn't care less what cost basis is. So that was a huge learning.

Later on, we were starting the scale of the sales team, we had an amazing first sale person named Raph. I gave him free range to go build a team. And the first person that he brought in, I was like, there's no way. There's no way that this guy is going to be successful in selling to VPs of engineering. He was from Jersey, slicked-back hair, not the vibe that you expect an engineer to be really excited to work with having sales, intense vibe. And so I actually said no. And then Raph overrode me. He said, "No, you're wrong and I'm going to hire him. You're going to see." I was wrong. He was our most successful sales rep for the entirety of Segment's history and his customers loved him. What I learned from going out in the field with him over the years was that he was extremely intense about extracting information from the customer about what the value was to them. Many cases, I think clarified their own understanding in the process. And so by clarifying what the value was going to be, then he could walk back to well, and here's how the product is going to solve that value. It's very simple, very clear, exceptionally methodical and customers love him for it. That last piece of what makes a great sale? Yeah, sure. Relationship building, being a smooth talker maybe, but what actually matters is, can you get the customer to actually tell you what the value is that they get out of the product? And then can you connect that to what the product does.

Patrick: [00:24:58] Can you say any more about what that feels or looks like? Whether there are specific questions that are asked or a routine with a new customer that helps you triangulate on, what part of it might be valuable or how valuable it might be? It sounds intuitive but it also sounds hard. So I'm just curious what literally works when trying to get to that endpoint.

Peter: [00:25:19] What's hard about it is that it's awkward. I remember we were in this one media company in New York and the person was like, "Well, we're having some challenges with our data. So that's why we wanted you here to walk us through your pitch." And somebody was like, "Well, why do you have problems with your data?" And then the person responded, "Oh, well we have trouble integrating this, that, and the other thing..." "Well, but why do you have trouble integrating those things?" And it's like, "Dude, you're supposed to be telling me that it's hard. Why are you asking me?" And then the customer was so baffled by this but then just kept answering these questions and we're articulating the pitch. We're self-articulating the pitch back to him and all he was asking was why. And every other person in the room, there were four of us. Every time he asked why we're cringing with the awkwardness of just, "I can't believe he asked that." We're supposed to be explaining that. And it was extremely effective. You just get the customer to articulate it, clarifying for them, it's clarifying for you. The whole thing moves faster but it's very awkward. I think that is actually the reason why most people don't do it. It's just awkward.

Patrick: [00:26:18] And so it sounds like you have to almost invert the entire way of thinking. You go in with a pitch deck telling people stuff and instead go in like a truffle pig, basically trying to sniff out where the actual pain point is but have them say it not you, is that a fair summation of the strategy?

Peter: [00:26:34] Any great enterprise sales organization actually knows this but it was completely mind-bending and mind-altering for me as a 22-year-old or whatever coming out of engineering school.

Patrick: [00:26:42] So when this all started, maybe you can orient us in time. So now you've got this open-source thing that was an overnight sensation if you will, lots of penetration to the developer community, what else was happening that you were selling? Literally, what were you selling? How did you decide what product meant that you would charge for versus source code that anyone could access on Github or somewhere like that?

Peter: [00:27:04] Yeah, so we got lucky in this regard, actually that the open-source product "never really competed with the hosted product." And the reason is that the open-source products by nature of being open-source doesn't solve the problem. And that's because you would have to deploy it yourself as a customer. But the entire point is to get the engineer out of the loop and empower a marketer or some business person to turn on an integration to send data. We got very lucky and the structure of the product and the structure of the business and the whole value proposition that the open-source library and engineer could look at it and be like, "It's well-designed, it's well written. It's well-architected, it's the appropriate abstraction. I like it."

And then they're like, "Okay, but I'm not going to play this open-source library because that doesn't solve the problem. Where is the hosted version?" And go to Segment buy the hosted version. So the structure of the thing, I think it was pure luck that we never really had to compete with open-source. And all of the value that we added on later was fundamental nature had to be inside the core data processing pipeline, which we host. We never faced that tension between those two.

Scaling Sales
Patrick: [00:28:05] Can you describe what you learned in this process about the relationship between the structure of the sales team, the model for pricing, and the level of pricing? So I'm assuming that those three things all work in this recipe that makes or breaks a successful enterprise sales distribution effort. What did you learn about that? What you charge for, how you charge, how much you had to generate per salesperson? Those details about building a successful enterprise sales team would be fascinating.

Peter: [00:28:36] You have to be able to get to a quota per salesperson of $1.5 to $2 million a year very quickly. If you look at a salesperson's time allocation, the only way they're going to get there on the enterprise side at least is if the deals are easily in the six figures. So you pretty quickly back into what the price point has to be. And then the question is, do you deliver enough value to be at that price point? The other sales models right are super high velocity, tiny sales with very junior reps who are just closing inbound interest. We have some of that too but by and large, over time, we've discovered that most of our market is in the enterprise where honestly it has more to do with the buying cycle, which is you can't make it through the buying cycle, unless you put it in enough resources, such that you will then have to charge six figures because you need to be able to pay a sales rep and the sales engineer and so on.

I think you end up being more constrained by the buying process that your customers want to go through. If your customers, say Twilio today, has a very different buying process, which is the customers love to self-serve its developers. They love to come in and they love to start sending the first test on us. They love to do this, that, and the other thing. And then eventually they get to significant volume and then a sale person with the conversation with them. That's how those customers want to buy. So again, it's almost like flipping the mentality of how do I want to go to market with this thing? To nobody cares. How do your customers want to buy? That is what matters here. And so we have different parts of our market. Some parts of our market want to self-serve. And so we've got a self-serve thing where they can come in and use it start getting started. And our sales reps will help along the way, especially in the back half of that. But most of our market is companies that want to turn the crank on the same SaaS buying process that everyone else has and run a proper sales process with multiple vendors and salespeople and sales engineers, and so on. If that's how they want to buy we got to show up.

Patrick: [00:30:24] What's magic about that quota number? Let's call it $2 million just to keep it round. Never thought about this before you might hear $2 million per salesperson sounds really high thinking about the cost of the salesperson's time and whatever. So what else is in that equation? That does seem to be the standard you hear from other companies that are selling into enterprises. What's beneath that two million that as you think about your company's margin or whatever, maybe would surprise people?

Peter: [00:30:47] If you have normal software margins of 80% or whatever, then that's where you end up in terms of once you pay for all the other marketing and acquisition costs and pay your gross margin, your cost of goods sold in terms of processing and data processing and stuff like that. And then once you pay commissions, not only for the...even for the sales development rep and sales engineer and for a couple of other people on the way, once you pay for the customer success manager. All these things, those economics close at $1.5 to $2 million. If your margin starts coming down from 70%, 60%, 50%, 40%, your quota fundamentally has to go higher because you've got less contribution margin for the 80% or whatever you're getting out. You've got less to play with there in terms of paying out all the commission and so on along the way. So therefore you need to drive more volume per sales rep but those are the fundamental constraints that you're planning with.

Patrick: [00:31:39] The consensus has been that certainly in the last 10 years software as a business model, certainly SaaS as a business model is the holy grail on average, really high gross margin scales incredibly beautifully. The market has been enormous and growing really fast. What has it felt like to be an investor but a participant in that ecosystem? And how do you think that changes or evolves into the future? Do you think that that will continue to be the case or do we have the Cambrian explosion behind us?

Peter: [00:32:07] 2012, it felt like a Cambrian explosion, which is when we got started with Segment. It felt like every week there was at least one interesting new SaaS company launching on Hacker News, just constantly. It doesn't quite feel that way anymore. It feels more like derivatives or like in-between concepts launching on Hacker News. So I do feel like the Cambrian explosion of SaaS might be behind us. I don't know if the investor would disagree with that but certainly, on Hacker News, it appears like a lot of the v1's and everything are out there. And so one other interesting thing to me was that when we launched in 2012, the number of startups was also exploding. So our initial go-to-market was startups. They understood the value proposition and they were just building and so on. What we noticed is that it was a great starting market for us. Our growth was extremely fast because we were selling into a cohort of companies who are growing in their own right. And the number of them was growing and our market penetration within that group was growing. So you just had three growing things stacked on top of each other. And so you just saw this explosive growth. In one year, we went from $2.5M in ARR to $10M and so on. The thing just took off. Something weird did start happening around 2016. And I've seen these charts from a few different companies but the number of properly funded startups seems to have flat-lined or slightly started declining around 2016, 2017. And so that same triple expansionary market force in startups, something changed in 2016, 2017. And that was around the time that we transitioned upmarket or started going more upmarket into the enterprise. So it didn't affect our ability to grow. But I wonder if it affects new startups' ability to grow because there isn't a cohort of peers that they can sell their SaaS into each other, basically. But yeah, there are a few different companies where I've seen their internal reports on their startup programs and something funky happened starting in 2016, 2017.

Revenue Operations
Patrick: [00:34:03] Before we leave the topic of what you learned in scaling the sales side of the business. We had talked before, too about this concept of revenue operations, in that you started to walk through with the $2 million on down and why that quota exists. Say a bit about what you've come to appreciate about rev ops. You don't hear anyone talk about this as a system that gets optimized over time but I think you learned hands-on that there's a lot of value to be extracted there if you do a good job building. Any other thoughts on that topic?

Peter: [00:34:32] Yeah. Revenue operations, I think is deeply underappreciated. If you're going to build a large sales team which you're going to do if you're doing enterprise software, then the question is how do you design them? The commission plan or quota is one aspect of a very complex machine of territories, what companies do you put in those territories? How do you classify those? Are there tier-one territories that they should really be outbounding into and then different territories that they'll accept inbound leads ground but they're less likely to close unless they have the inbound energy? How do you think about which industry verticals to target? Those are the targeting questions.

Well, then there's the question of ratios. For every account executive, how many sales engineers should there be? There's one sales engineer who support 2 or 4 or 6 AEs, for example. What about sales development representatives? Inbound and outbound. Are they the same? And how many SDRs should there be for how many AEs? So all these ratios. What about customer Success Managers to AEs? It's one thing when you have this scrappy team that's getting it done in the early days but when you break through to $20, $30, $40, $50 million ARR, it's a big team and these ratios matter a lot for the overall economics and the overall accountability structure and so on. It's very complicated to design and there are people who are absolute wizards of this. And what I think is also interesting is it's not like rev ops earns their keep or whatever by extracting more from a sales team. In many cases, it's actually smoothing the entire sales pipeline. So everyone is actually happy maybe even doing less work but actually getting more results. It's not like rev ops comes in and squeezes 10% and squeezes 10% and squeezes 10%. It's like they come in and they make sure that at all points in the year, we're going to have the right ratio of all these people so that flow of customers, inbound interests coming in actually makes it all the way through to being a closed one successful customer that's going to renew next year. And that is not a 10% improvement. That's like a 2x or 5x potential improvement because as you start getting that stuff right it also shows you how you should deploy the capital that you've just raised and it keeps your growth rate high.

It's like they come in and they make sure that at all points in the year, we're going to have the right ratio of all these people so that flow of customers, inbound interests coming in actually makes it all the way through to being a closed one successful customer that's going to renew next year. And that is not a 10% improvement. That's like a 2x or 5x potential improvement because as you start getting that stuff right it also shows you how you should deploy the capital that you've just raised and it keeps your growth rate high.

Patrick: [00:36:40] And probably it starts in the way you described before with the revenue event and the method through which people want to buy. You have to respect that first and then just constantly work your way backward toward the team members, would be the very beginning of the whole process. And then just constantly do that on a loop. This conversation on backward efficiency makes me think of another conversation we had last time we talked about companies like Tesla and business models that almost threw their products, bootstrap, good scale economics in some underlying piece of technology, whether it's batteries or whatever. I love your thinking on this sort of thing. Could you talk through that concept for us? Because I do think we'll see a lot of hardware and other kinds of technology innovations in the next decade.

Peter: [00:37:23] Yeah. I think people think of Tesla as a car company, which is why everyone was so upset when they bought the solar company. Tesla is really a battery company and for them, it's a question of how do they achieve scale in battery production? The world is literally not producing enough batteries for them and so they are pushing the envelope on battery production. This is the question that I think Elon and the team figured out, which is really impressive is they were like, well, we need a way to sell a car that's super-premium because the batteries are expensive to start with. And so we're going to start with the Roadster and then we'll go to the model S next and then the model 3, and then so on down into utility-scale storage. But this concept of premium markets, I think is very interesting. And it's something that I think pretty much every hardware company should copy once you're a Roadster market because if you're in the hardware business, you're in an economies of scale market.

Interestingly in SaaS, and maybe that's actually sales. Anything into a very significant degree, it may be that you are trying to achieve economies of scale in sales and I think that's why you end up with these big conglomerates, honestly, the Salesforce, the other big software companies that purchase and acquire their way into large product suites and the key to their success is a large sales team. I think they've achieved with sort of customer account lock-in effects, where they have great relationships in all the big accounts that matter. Companies like to buy from someone they already know and understand a single throat to choke do well. And I do wonder in SaaS if actually the scale economy or moat that gets created is actually the sales team.

Patrick: [00:38:51] I love the idea. And if you think about the sources of competitive advantage, kind of the famous ones, I think the ones that you often find your way back to steady-state in the long-term. So there's things like counter positioning early on that can be really effective, but long-term huge companies what's their defensibility? It's scale. It's either supply or demand-side scale. A network effect maybe in a consumer business. Or something like what you're describing a supply side scale effect. I think people get the Roadster, model S, model 3 idea that by selling something higher, you can sort of fund the scale production of batteries and work your way down. Maybe just say a little bit more about understanding it could be sales and software that's the scale advantage. What's the Roadster equivalent then? If you're a new company trying to get to that scale, does that mean that you should be going after the biggest customers first and kind of going all-in on a fewer number of customers and then letting that system work its way down? Is there enough of an analogy there to draw on?

Peter: [00:39:48] Yeah, I think rather than thinking about it as the cost to manufacture the product in a SaaS context, you have to think about it as the cost to acquire the customer. You need to start with the customers that have the lowest cost to acquire. If your sales price is kind of constant, the way you get that biggest premium is by minimizing your cost to acquire, which means that the business models that have, or the companies that have inbound flow of deals are going to have the most efficient sales cycles. And that's what's going to allow you to build out a sales team efficiently and kind of achieve scale over time. Actually, venture capitalists look for this. Venture capitalist specifically go and look for the most promising companies being the ones that have a lot of inbound interest that have a fairly passive high quota sales team that can plug and chug on inbound interest coming in. Knowing full well that at scale it will, of course, have to transition to an outbound sales model, maybe the next Salesforce, that actually has sort of account locks on all those big customers. But that transition I think is from the most efficient sales model to one that has that moat established.


 

Patrick: [00:40:53] Any other thoughts on how with this maturity, these couple of amazing, like Salesforce is a great example, it's in the name. Literally unbelievable scaled sales operations, and it makes them naturally a buyer for great software products that can be pushed through those distribution. Arguably Twilio is the same story, right? That the relationships that it has built with developers mean now they can just keep solving more problems for developers. And they're sort of the natural winner of continued innovation in this space because it's so hard to compete against. Do you think that story just runs for a long time or do you think we'll see other attacks on these big-scale winners in sales?

Peter: [00:41:30] I think there may be limits to those economies of scale. First, just like the sheer number of products that you can ask the sales team to cross-sell. The second is again what is the actual customer experience of using those products? And so I think when you look at a lot of these big suites, the products that they've purchased they've acquired in this is not integrated. They're basically separate products that have a loss layer and branding slapped on top. In the end that's not that compelling to customers. I think there is a little bit of an embedded lifetime in there of at some point someone comes along with a solution that's more integrated or solves a problem in a different way, restructures it such that it gets disrupted. I do think for a lot of these things suites that is likely to eventually happen and maybe a deeper force that undercuts the kind of sales moats. The biggest complaint about these marketing and sales suites is that they're not integrated and drives customers nuts.

Patrick: [00:42:22] I love the lessons from these chapters of the business. And I think maybe there's two more chapters to ask what lessons stand out from your memory of those chapters. The first is I'll call it chapter three, the later more mature version of Segment as an independent company up through the acquisition by Twilio, and then chapter four will be what you've learned at Twilio so far about business, about any of this stuff product, et cetera. What lessons stand out from those two separate chapters of the Segment journey?

Peter: [00:42:47] I think from the chapter of basically scaling from $10 on up to $100M ARR on up. It's probably always talked about around rev ops. Frankly, I think I missed the boat there. I actually still kept spending most of my time focused on product. That's what had gotten me there or gotten us there. I think that was probably actually the wrong choice. I think we probably should have spent a lot of that time focused on revenue operations and figuring out how do we actually build for scale in terms of going out and winning these customers and understanding our target audience and everything. So that was the big lesson for me from that period.

In terms of post Twilio, there's a lot of things to learn. That's actually one of the things I'm most excited about personally being at Twilio now is George Hu, the Chief Operating Officer, unbelievable. He was COO at Salesforce before this and just incredible depth of operating experience. It is next level of getting inspected by George or getting inspected by Khozema the CFO at Twilio. Both are just wicked sharp in terms of isolating what the actual business problem is and driving accountability. I think for me, one of the things that I've been really trying to learn over the last year and that I think has been accelerated is how to drive accountability in a larger organization. It's one thing when you're working with your friends or working with a small team, but the Segment organization is now 600 people. Quite a bit bigger than that by the end of the year, because we're hiring very aggressively. I think we have a few hundred open reps right now. How do you hold accountable and operate at the right level of altitude in that kind of organization is something that I'm really excited to be learning from George and Khozema.

Patrick: [00:44:18] What have you learned so far? What are the key early lessons there?

Peter: [00:44:21] One lesson that's really interesting is this concept of hierarchical unpacking. For example, George will ask, "What's your plan for next year?" "Okay, well, our plan is to do X amount of revenue." "Okay, what's the new bookings on that?" "All right we'll do bookings is X." "Okay. How many reps do you need to go do that in each quarter?" "Okay, well XYZ." And he's like, "Okay. How many regional directors do you have to support those AEs today? And how many regional directors they're going to need to hire? When are you going to hire them?" "Well, yeah, we need to hire a whole bunch in Q1" And then it's like, "Okay, you have the recruiting resources to hire those in Q1?" Is it just like, we're seven levels deep now, 40 seconds in. This unpacking of one intuition for where the bottleneck is likely to be. Two being very crisp about whether we really have solved that bottleneck or not. So I guess part of it is kind of the concept of like a bottleneck theory of business which was like there's always one bottleneck somewhere that's constraining growth. And so isolating what those bottlenecks are and making sure that we're executing against changing them is super important. Trying to build this intuition and inspection model of how do you go and verify at all of these levels it's actually going to close, but the plan is in the pipe dream that it actually goes all the way to ground truth of like, "Yeah, all right. We can hire those recruiters in time and do all these things and stage it out timeline-wise. And yeah, it's actually going to work." That I think is probably my number one lesson.

Patrick: [00:45:40] Absolutely fascinating. And I'm sure key to any company of that size. You have people that can drill that quickly and identify leverage points quickly. That just seems like the skill that would matter in such a big organization. What have we not touched on around Segment specifically? Like one interesting area, we really haven't talked about at all is the importance of data for companies. The reason that you're going to grow is more companies are using more data in more places to affect their business. Their marketing, their product, whatever. Is there anything interesting there, since you're the pipes you get the cool seat to see how and why, and when data is being used. What have you noticed there? What's been the evolution of how companies use this stuff?

Peter: [00:46:20] We do see how data flows to these hundreds of different integrations and each of those integrations is really a whole company that does something interesting with customer data. The trends are interesting. There are basically five categories of tools that people really depend on. One of them is basic analytics. So what's happening on the website? What's happening on the web? The second is email marketing. The third is pushing notification and SMS marketing. The fourth is advertising. So think Facebook or Twitter or LinkedIn. And the fifth is an advanced analytics use case, which is data warehousing. After that, it falls off dramatically.

Some people use customer data to improve support experiences and stuff like that. That is pretty a little bit rare, although I think probably growing very quickly, but those are the top use cases. I think one of the things that we are excited about at Twilio is Twilio has always been very focused on communicating with customers, enabling these communication channels, SMS, voice, video, email with SendGrid, push notifications, et cetera. So I wasn't very interested in enabling those communications, but never had the customer data to then improve who should you be sending those to, at what time, why, with what message? And Segment does like literally the inverse. Of all the data which should inform what message you send to who when and none of the communication channels to actually send that. I think what we're really excited about is bringing these two things together. And all of a sudden you have both the world's best customer data platform and the world's best APIs of communication that opens a lot of very interesting possibilities. I also think that there's a future where today you have these applications that are very role-specific. You have a support desk for your support team. You have a CRM for your salespeople, and you have the marketing tool for your email marketing, advertising tool for your advertising; so role-specific. I do think machine learning is going to make the blending amongst these different engagement layers, and tools very confusing actually for the next 10, 20 years. I don't know how long it will take to come to full fruition of machine learning during most of it. Is going to be confusing though, because you already have the blending of support and sales and a lot of business models and how that then interacts with oh, well, we're tweeting at customers. That whole sort of pipeline I think is going to get very messy. And those applications are going to blend, especially as machine learning starts to make more recommendations for what should happen where. It's going to be super interesting to see how that plays out.

Data Privacy
Patrick: [00:48:50] Seems like a really key trend in the world, especially on customer data is privacy. And I know there's a lot of changes happening maybe with Apple and other platforms that have been in the news a lot. I'd love you to describe your perspective on what those changes are. Maybe even describe them. What they mean for the system writ large. What changes in privacy preferences and rules might do to how customer data matters or is used?

Peter: [00:49:14] So I'm actually super stoked about how the privacy landscape has changed over the last three years. Back in 2013, I think right after we launched analytics.js and we're getting all these requests for integrations. I think the only integrations that we turned down or started rejecting because remember we were very customer-led at this point. We were like, no vision, we'll send you a customer task. That wasn't quite true. There was one exception to that, but that's when customers would ask us to integrate a tool that was about sharing third-party data. We integrated them. You can find it in our blog. Two weeks later, we were like that was a terrible idea. And we booted them off the platform.

In many ways, they were legal at the time. Now it's probably illegal to do what they did, but it just didn't feel right. It didn't feel like the end customer was going to expect that their data was being shared in this fashion, regardless of whether they clicked through some legal doc. We rubbed a random person on the street and ask them, "Are you aware that your credit card data is connected to cookies and your online browsing history?" I guarantee you it's a 0% hit rate, no one thinks that that's what's happening. Or maybe they do, but they're pissed off about it. And to me it was like, or to all of us, it was like, okay, great. There's some companies that are pretty sleazy and they're going to capture some arbitrage window here where this is legal. This is going to close. First of all, it's horrible. It's not what people actually expect. And eventually, that will end up in regulation. So one is the wrong thing to do and two in the long run time is not going to pay off. That was right around the time that data management platforms or DMPs were exploding, which are literally giant warehouses and data trading for third-party sales. There was a lot of investor confusion that were like, "Oh I don't understand. You have so much data flying." They were like, "Shouldn't you just be a DMP too." And we were like, "No." At the time it was a very contrarian bet I guess would be the hip term to use. And so it's actually very vindicating now in 2021, but the last three years basically saw the complete demise of DMPs, like their worthless assets. The one that Salesforce acquired is now being sued a $10 billion class-action lawsuit or something and it's a mess. And you are starting to see things like CCPA and California. You're starting to see GDPR in Europe, some hints maybe that something will happen at the US federal and US federal level, interesting things are happening in Brazil and India and so on. Plus Apple is making moves of killing off third-party cookies along with Google. So there's a lot of really awesome things I think happening now in focusing people on first-party data and helping companies just do first-party data stuff to engage better with their customers. And that's where we've been pointed for a long time. So it's actually really awesome seeing a lot of the other noise get trimmed off by these changes.

Patrick: [00:51:46] Who do you think it hurts the most that are still legitimate businesses? You mentioned businesses that are sort of useless now, but I think there are plenty of businesses that benefit from the ability to target marketing or do whatever that changes in preferences or standards may affect. Who do you think that is? Is there a category that this is good for versus obviously, it's good for Segment. This is kind of what you do. Who would it be bad for? How does it affect the business landscape that way?

Peter: [00:52:13] I would add that it's good by choice, but yes, it is good for a Segment now. Having made that choice many years ago, seemingly at the time, kind of separate for it. It's great for Google. It's great for Facebook. It's great for Twitter. It's great for any company that has their own consumer, probably great for LinkedIn. Any company that has their own rights and reasons to actually have legitimate data, unique data on a person or a company, because that person wants to be a part of that platform, benefits from this. The people or companies who are really hurt by it, or the companies that exist in the middle purely for the purpose of connecting third-party datasets because zillions of ad networks that have existed in sleazy sketchy ad data deals in the background for a long time those are the companies that are hurting. But yeah, it will cause a centralization of ad revenue on the Googles and the Facebooks and LinkedIn and Twitter and Pinterest and Snapchats of the world. The people who have their own consumer network effects that walk in their audience and giving them unique data about their audience.

Patrick: [00:53:11] Do you think it affects the users of that data much? So if I'm like a D2C brand selling whatever flowers on Facebook or something, do you think that it changes the landscape for the end merchant all that much?

Peter: [00:53:23] It does. It increases the cost to acquire slightly. It's harder to target. If you sort of play through the ramifications of that, it probably means that if your cost to a buyer goes up, it probably means that your lifetime value needs to go up in equal measure, which means you actually need to spend more time making sure your customers are happy. I'm not sure that it's a net negative for the end consumer in that sense that's okay. Now my bank actually needs to make sure that I'm happy with me. The airline actually needs to make sure that I'm happy as opposed to just going and acquiring the next person who goes to Google search. The externalities are a little complicated to play out, but I think there's actually a pretty good world on the other end of it, but it doesn't involve customer or company is going and properly engaging post-acquisition.

Lessons Learned
Patrick: [00:54:04] We live in this cool era of so much educational content. We're certainly trying to do our part to bootstrap as much knowledge into the world open-source style honestly as possible for others to build on top of lots of conversations like this one floating out there that wouldn't existed 5 years ago even. The downside of that is like anything. There's a lot of good advice. There's a lot of bad advice. What do you think now, having kind of done the whole life cycle thing from early pivots, to scaling, to acquisition, to growing inside of a bigger firm, what do you think are the worst bits of advice that you hear doled out to other would-be entrepreneurs?

Peter: [00:54:38] I hate the Airbnb story. Airbnb story is we had this idea that people can sleep on couches. We just thought that that is the way the world should be, is literally the opposite of my story. The thought that this is just, it makes sense for how the world should work. We just hung on for years until it took off. And we did all this crazy stuff like captain crunch cereal and this, that, and the other thing and eventually these hacks got it going and we were right. All right. For every 10,000 Segment's out there, there will be an Airbnb, but do not bank on that. If you're just hanging on for dear life on how you think the world should work, you're going to get one shot on goal and it's almost certainly not going get... I don't know. I think the Airbnb story is maybe one of the... I don't know if it's advice, if taken as advice, their story is the wrong takeaway.

Patrick: [00:55:23] Is the heuristic that emerges from that story demand traction? Is it just really insist on clear evidence that something is working and be pretty impatient about that?

Peter: [00:55:34] I think so. And actually Justin Kan, the founders of Twitch was like, first-time founders care about product or spend all their time on product and second time founders spend all their time on go to market. One I think that's true. Two It's maybe slightly misleading but it's not that they're necessarily spending their time on sales or sales just to generate revenue. It's spending the time I go to market because it's actually the best signal that whether your product is really the right thing. Because you're actually spending time with the customer and actually getting down to what is the real value that you're delivering with them. So I think it's pithy, but it's also as he worded it. But I think it is indicative of this, go out into the world and understand what the world really wants and really needs as opposed to like your vision of the product. And that outside-in perspective, I think is supercritical by far the most important thing.

Patrick: [00:56:21] Rather than asking for generic good advice. I'll ask, was there any bit of advice that you received and if so, from whom in the Segment journey that you think was especially impactful?

Peter: [00:56:32] Mitch's advice to raise prices 1000x was pretty impactful.

Patrick: [00:56:34] I like that one.

Peter: [00:56:37] Yeah. At the end of the day, wouldn't have a company if we haven't raised prices 1000x. Not everyone is happy with our pricing for the record, there's problems there for us to fix. But yeah.

Patrick: [00:56:48] What has you most excited for the future?

Peter: [00:56:50] I think there's a very deep and compelling roadmap for Twilio and Segment combined. I'm spending much of my time on it, as you can imagine over the last 6 months since the acquisition closed, and yeah, this just going to be super exciting. There's just crazy stuff that we can go build there. I also spend a reasonable amount of time and climate tech and both Charm and on the philanthropic side. And there are good things happening there after a bit of a dark period over the last decade. So I'm really excited about that as well.

Patrick: [00:57:14] I remember meeting Jeff for the first time and when he walks into the room, he's just got kind of this effect. You can just tell that this is kind of a unique human, and it's an excuse to ask a bit about leadership, both what you've learned yourself, running a company, and also working with some great leaders like Jeff. What do you think matters there? And it can be about him specifically or taken as a more general question. What works in leadership in this kind of modern world? And I think Jeff embodies some of that word modern is used intentionally here. It seems like he has his finger on the pulse of what matters. What have you learned about leadership from him or from your own experience?

Peter: [00:57:46] Three observations I am trying to learn from, specifically from Jeff. One, deeply cares about the culture. It is the top topic and that level of dedication over how many years, 12 years, like it shows people love to work there. The second is he doesn't take no for an answer. If something needs to get done, it needs to get done. And it is what it is. And you can kind of try to avoid somebody for a little while, but it's going to wear you down. That's what happened with our acquisition too. He and I chatted once a quarter for 18 months and at the end, I was like, "All right, Jeff, I buy the vision. It's exciting." He's not going to take no, it might take a while, but he's not going to take no. And the same is actually true inside too. And it has its trade-offs, but it's effective. And the last is just like the level of energy that he brings to this a cultural piece, I guess, for the level of energy that it brings to all hands, the level of energy that he brings to everything that he does and how much momentum that imparts to a large team is very impressive. There's a lot to learn there. I started out as a very quiet nerd would not get up and present in front of 15 people. So got a lot to learn there from Jeff.

Patrick: [00:58:52] You make me think of the literally the pictures he posts after the quarterly earnings calls. You could feel the energy through the pictures. It's not even a video, just the smiles and the thumbs up and the picture held up it definitely is notable and unique. Two more questions for you. One more on leadership, which is, you mentioned maybe starting out as a quieter leader. In what ways do you think you've changed the most personally across the Segment journey for the better? What was maybe the hardest one to do?

Peter: [00:59:19] The hardest one came from that first two years where I was very used to being right. I was a star student and I was A+ student, aced everything all the way through MIT and then I got destroyed. Got destroyed in a year and a half. I was just wrong, no way around it. And it was very eye-opening, very humbling I would say. I think that you don't know the right answer. You got to go find the right answer and you'll be rewarded for getting the right answer fast. But you do not know the right answer until you go ask someone else. That's just not how school works, but that is how the real world works. So that I think was a very tough and good lesson from the first two years.

Another hard lesson, I think as someone who studied academically very hard is you do the work yourself. That's the wrong question for leading a company. Your work is to inspire other people to do the work and then explain why it's important, which is a fundamentally different skill than doing the work yourself. And that's actually what I'm still trying to get better at getting better at explaining the why and why it matters and why we should go do it.

Kindest Act
Patrick: [01:00:21] I've loved this conversation. I've learned a lot from you just in the couple of times we've talked and I think yours is an incredibly frank and honest perspective on company building. That's a little bit more squared with reality than grand visions of the future. And I've loved learning from you. I think you know my traditional closing question for everybody, which is to ask, what is the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you?

Peter: [01:00:41] I guess it'd be kind of a tough-love moment. I don't think my dad remembers this, but when I was about 13 or so, I was picking up a new project every two weeks and I would never finish the previous one. I was like, "Oh, I'm going to build a go-cart. Oh, I'm going to build a supersonic weed wacker." Yeah, just crazy projects. And I've never finished any of them. It's just like an off-hand comment as he walked by one day, he was like, "Oh, eventually you're going to have to learn to finish something," and passed by. I was totally floored at the time. And yeah, 20 years later, it's still stuck with me as finishing things matters a lot. But anyway, those kinds of tough love lessons I think in retrospect they're probably some of the kindest things that can happen to one.

Patrick: [01:01:19] You have been so much fun, Peter. I really appreciate the time all that you shared with the audience. Thank you.

Peter: [01:01:24] Thank you. Take care.

Created by @_Nick_Diller

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
