
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released January 17th, 2022
Invest Like the Best
Ricky Sandler - Building an Investment Compass
Ricky Sandler is the founder of Eminence Capital. We cover Ricky's evolution as an active investor, why he thinks this is a stock picker's environment, and what keeps him competitive after a long and successful career.

00:00:00
01:07:59
Introduction
[00:02:21] Patrick: My guest today is Ricky Sandler, founder of Eminence Capital. Ricky's a hedge fund veteran managing over $8 billion of assets across Eminence's strategies. We cover Ricky's evolution as an active investor, why he thinks this is a stock picker environment, and what keeps him competitive after a long and successful career. Please enjoy my conversation with Ricky Sandler.

Leadership in Great Investment Firms
[00:02:42] Patrick: Do you think that most great investment firms can or should be led by a single investor?

[00:02:49] Ricky: Patrick, thanks. Great to be here with you, and I believe that the answer to that is yes. I believe that somebody needs to be CIO, needs to own it. He or she needs to have really strong lieutenants who have a ton of responsibility, who can deploy capital. So it doesn't mean he's the only one deploying capital, but I think at the end of the day, management by committee is dangerous. I do believe that a single CIO structure is important, how that all fits into someone who could be chairman or the CIO, but you need accountability at the top to set kind of direction.

[00:03:27] Patrick: And how does that most manifest in a productive way, meaning maybe in a way that would be harder by committee or with co-CIOs or something like that? Like what are the episodes where that power becomes the most valuable in your experience?

[00:03:40] Ricky: So I'd say, one, I think there is one person who is viewing all the opportunities across all the different sectors or analysts and is able to say like, "I know that's a really good idea to you, but I have six other ideas over here that are better and you don't see that you're just looking at this world." So that's one. I think two, some single person at the top who's working with other people begins to see his people's biases. And some people come in pounding the table, pounding their chest, great debaters, and their idea is actually mediocre, and some people come in, "I kind of think this is a pretty good idea, I mean, there's some risks." Knowing your tools and people is important and that is hard when you're more decentralized in terms of decision making.

And maybe the last point is I think an investment committee could lead to consensus think and ways that are not as good. I love debate by committee and we have three sectors that we view the world from, consumer, TMT, and we call it FIBHO, which is financials, business services, industrials, healthcare, other, because that's kind of how our portfolio... And we have sector meetings every week and we debate among a group of six to nine people. And I love that, but ultimately I think decisions at the top are important.

[00:05:08] Patrick: I love the idea that Paul Enright taught me, which is that a CIO can be a great analyst, but often, the skill of allocating capital across a set of ideas in the way you've described is quite a distinct skill from being a great individual security analyst. Which do you think you're personally better at and which do you enjoy more? Like where do you get your joy in the investing process on a repeated basis?

[00:05:31] Ricky: It's an interesting question because I love digging into the stocks, but I think I'm good at zooming out and getting out of the weeds. So I think I'm better as an allocator than I would be as a digger and someone that's doing FOIA requests and walking trade shows. I'm better at having good people who do that, seeing those things. As a CIO investor, I'm much more of, "That's a great idea," not, "Let's go buy tech stocks or healthcare." I have some of those big picture views. I'm a individual company person at heart. That helps me help them the most because I can kind of distinguish between pretty good and great and add a different perspective to the whole debate.

[00:06:22] Patrick: How do you do that? You love the individual companies, you've got a talented team bringing you great ideas, how do you help them? And in what ways are you better at that via experience than you were maybe at the start and 10 years ago or whatever? What is that skill that you're bringing? What are you literally doing to bring the best out of them?

[00:06:38] Ricky: I'm a heavy participant in these sector meetings and kind of direct them. And so my ability to boil things down to important things, shift the discussion to what will really be important for the business and for the stock I think adds a lot to the discussion. And I think having both seen so much over my 30 years plus in the business and seeing also lots of different sectors and different things, I think I'm good at distilling that and then hopefully helping them distinguish between I could sort of say pretty good and great. And I was an analyst first, so I can start picking through their models and look at the cash flow statement and say I'm kind of getting to the weeds of things as well.

I think it's that longer term perspective. I think the key is you go over time. We all have a lot of wisdom and experience from all the different things we had and it's important that we don't get too colored by the wins and scars because you can have too many ends of one or two, but draw broad conclusions and things that generally work or generally don't work, but also have younger people around you to kind of challenge you sometimes to your close-minded, "I don't buy those kinds of businesses," or, "This always works." And I think that's the push and pull of someone at the top and a team of younger people who I say a lot of value in naive energy, someone who loves an idea and it's a little bit naive, but it can open your mind to a different way to look at something.

[00:08:16] Patrick: And this could be in today's environment or just more generally, what are the most common types of what I'll call fool's gold that you encounter that you've been trained to recognize? Meaning an analyst brings you something for some set of reasons or whatever, it's something where you say, "Yeah, yeah, I realize why you think this looks good, but here's the reality or the thing you're not considering," or whatever. If you think of fool's gold conceptually, what comes most to mind?

[00:08:40] Ricky: So one I think classic one is comping a stock or evaluation to itself, to another set of businesses or to a period of time, which is just a period of time. And evaluations move a lot and I think that an analyst can get anchored into... A very recent example is these high growth companies have corrected to pre-COVID valuations. And I might say actually pre-COVID valuations for growth stocks were pretty high. If you look back three or four years before that, they didn't trade there. Now, that might have been wrong, this might have been wrong, but anchoring it like, "It used to trade here. And so if it gets back to this multiple, this is where it could trade."

So I think that's kind of one common mistake that people make. I think the other one is this notion that we're just trying to buy great businesses that great things happen to and we're trying to short bad businesses, that bad businesses happen to. And the problem with that is if it's priced like a great business and it turns out to be just shy of a great business, you're going to earn a subpar return, and if it's bad and it turns out to be a little bit better than bad, you're going to lose a bunch on the short side.

There's inherent expectations that we are in the stock business, which over a very long period of time, yes, stocks move in line with businesses, but they do so much of this and that. And if you think about an investment timeline, I tend to think of our longs on like a three year basis. And that's pretty long in today's environment. The dislocations from this, "I just own a business that's going to grow for 10 years," I mean, I see this a lot on Twitter, like, "I'll take this portfolio 10 years from now," I'm like, "Do you know how long 10 years is? Do you know how many you're going to have to stomach big changes? Do you know how much the real world changes in 10 years?"

Google was created like a little over 20 years ago. 10 years is a really long time. And I'm a long-term investor, I think about businesses that way, but I do think that that notion that we're just trying to buy good and short bad is a bit of fool's gold and we're to buy mispriced securities and short disappointments and things that are going to underwhelm their investor base. That's what we're trying to do. We're trying to buy mispriced securities among a subset of ownable businesses. So I don't want to buy bad businesses, but I think that's a big thing that I see, particularly among the last five to 10 year investor base because they haven't seen as many cycles.

Identifying Opportunities in Mispricings
[00:11:02] Patrick: I think it's so important to point out that while buying great businesses has been great in this past X period of time, a big chunk of that return if you decompose it is multiple expansions. So my friend Carl Kawaja says everything eventually trades for 12 times earnings. Apple did and Microsoft did and all these companies did. And at the start of this great run where the lesson seems to be buy the great businesses, you have to realize a huge chunk of that return is going from five time sales to 40 times sales or something like that. And so mispriced security becomes the key term here, which leads me to the really important question of the pricing mechanism itself. I know you've thought a lot about market structure, market participants, the actual investors and their strategies that set prices. So if it's ultimately mispricing, a price setting mechanism is really important and the participants are really important. So talk me through that evolution because it's changed so much in your career and the state of it today is critical to success.

[00:11:58] Ricky: I'll start with the answer and then work backwards a little bit. Stock prices are moving around in a much bigger way, much more frequently on non-fundamental things and are much more divorced from fundamental value in a much bigger way than at any point in my career. If we just said, "Pick these four or five companies, bring in Bain, McKinsey, and two great investors to kind of give you a fair value," the number of things that would be way above and way below and how far they'd be is way wider today. That is a great thing for an investor on the long side, I'll get into this in a second, it poses a challenge for an investor on the short side, I'll talk about that, and it's all caused by, I think, changing market structure.

What's happened is, in short, the bottoms up fundamental investor is basically irrelevant in the daily trading and the daily movement of stock prices, maybe except for in the couple of weeks before and the couple weeks after a major earnings event or something like that. Call that two thirds or more, 75% of the time, they're kind of irrelevant, maybe 80%. We've gone from 20% or 25% passive to 55% passive investing today. That means that a lot of the market is just price accepters, price takers. It's there and I just continue it. Of the 45% that are supposed to be active, we now have quant funds, ESG funds, retail investors, momentum investors, macro investors. We have a lot of people who are not bottoms up fundamental investors.

And so the world of I think what adds the most value is a small world. Now, that's a wonderful thing. If you told me competition in your business went down a ton, which is what I would tell people, you'd be like, "God, that's amazing," and yet everyone's like, "It's so hard out there. Investing is hard." like talk through it because we lived in a world where the market gave us signals. If a stock was acting poorly, there was some chance that somebody knew that they were going to miss numbers. Now it's like random. And if the same stock is acting well, you're like, "People are figuring out my thesis," and it could be just random now, or these other players.

Random makes it sound even worse. People doing things for different reasons, a macro investor, an ESG investor, a pod who's using it as a part of a short basket to neutralize its factors. I mean, there's just big, big players out there that are not bottoms up fundamental investors. So that has created all this mis-pricing. And for a longer term investor on the long side, this should be purely positive. Why is that? Well, if I think the stock's going to go from 10 to 20 and it goes to six first, I have less risk on the table. I can buy more. If I did my work, it's easy to buy more and you end up with more alpha if it ends up at 20. If I think it's go from 10 to 20 and it goes to 17 in two months, it's a bigger position. I can sell it naturally. I can turn my capital and use the volatility to my advantage.

The inverse is not true on the short side. If I think a stock's going to go from 20 to 10, okay, but it goes to 30 first, I have a bigger position. I have more a risk on the table. I actually can't add. I might have to subtract. I know I have unlimited risk, I might get scared out. That dislocation creates a portfolio construction challenge. Obviously we're seeing, whether it's the meme stocks or the retail investors or other things that are going on where there's a lot of new investors who don't do the kind of work that we do setting stock prices that creates a total construction challenge.

So I think this is a definite change over my career that exists today. It's great for the long side. And the keys are, number one, use volatility to your advantage. Don't think the market is smarter than you if you've done your work. The market is giving you less and less signals today than it ever has. And then on the short side, we've had to rethink our portfolio construction some to navigate this, but it's like theoretically good, but practically doesn't work that way because of how short positions get bigger. So now you've got more risk on the table and you have unlimited open risks. So it just could that different set of practical considerations.

[00:16:16] Patrick: We've spent a ton of time, I think rightly so, with guests in the past talking through the principles of good and bad businesses, which you've mentioned is, in the long side, let's say, necessary but not sufficient for a great investment. You'd want good or great and a company with at the big mispricing, right? Would be the sort of the Goldilocks scenario. I'd love to do that same walkthrough, not about company quality, but about what I'll call mispricing quality, but in the same way that we can describe certain features, common features of a good business. What are common features of a good mispricing in your view?

[00:16:50] Ricky: I think when you can look at the other side, the narrative, the supply demand of the stock and say I know why this stock is trading here, they've had decelerating revenue for five quarters. I know people in the sector don't like to own decelerating revenue, or there's been margin pressure. By the way, I think that's going to change. So I think it's mispriced. Being able to visualize that while the stock is mispriced, you understand what is mispricing it. To me, that's the most clear thing, but sometimes it's simple supply demand like a distribution. A lot of sellers, a company was spun out and IPO'd and then a company distributed all its shares and there could just be simplistically supply and demand that can do it. Sometimes there are events like investors hate uncertainty. And so, if there's a legal issue or other things that could create a probabilistic big mispricing. IE, the market is pricing this like a 50/50 event, but it's a 90/10 event, but just because the uncertainty.

So I think there's certain things in human emotion. I think we do know following a period of earnings disappointments, you get investors who believe that A, there's a negative price momentum. B, a negative earnings momentum. People don't trust management and there begins this whole narrative. This is a bad company and every company goes through ups and downs. And so, understanding the human emotion elements I think can be part of it. So there's a few recurring examples of it, but ultimately it comes down to I understand the guy on the other side. He's totally wrong. He's doing things for other reasons, but I understand it. Those are the best cases of dispricing, because not only do you understand why the stock is where it is, but think you have a path to that change.

The Professional Investing Landscape
[00:18:45] Patrick: I can probably name on not that many hands, the number of other active equity investors with a pool of capital as big or bigger than yours. People would recognize their names. How do you interact with those people? If at the end of the day there is quite a bit of concentration in terms of who is allocating the big pools of capital, those people matter in setting prices. And you're part of that landscape and they're your competitors, but maybe they're your friends and frenemies or whatever. Talk me through the dynamic of your social interaction or professional interaction with the other big hedge fund and long-only investors.

[00:19:21] Ricky: I love to talk to other investors that I think are reasonably smart and sometimes different than me, because I begin to understand some of these dynamics we just talked about, like why stock will be trading here and you have someone else who's got a different framework. I go to a lot of idea lunches and dinners. I have conversations with other big market participants. A lot of times, not even about stocks. So I can go to lunch with a peer and we can talk about analyst process and compensation and business aspects. I talk to a lot of young people because I teach a class up at University of Wisconsin and I talk to a lot of young people. And one of the things I always say is, "Find your own investing compass because you got to be comfortable with it." And so you're going to meet all these people and talk to all these people and you're going to hear all these things. You're not going to recreate the wheel, but you're also not going to be just like Warren Buffett or just like Stan Druckenmiller. You might pick a few things and you create Patrick's investing compass.

This is what I believe in. And part of why that's important is because you need conviction amidst volatility and you've developed it over time. I learned from other people, both investing things and business things. I'll share with you one of your prior podcasts, Steve Mandel. And I had a Zoom with him a couple weeks ago because I reached out on a business related issue. We didn't even talk about markets or stocks. I like that and I think understanding the other players in the game and how they think, learning from other people, even if it's little pieces, I'm an open book to other people. What do we own? Why are we doing it? It is such a big world of capital out there that I don't think my great ideas of running a business and running a portfolio, you have to actually be able to execute it and there's an art to it. And I don't worry that somehow there's some great secrets out there. It's kind of putting it all together that's more important. Getting the right inputs is important.

[00:21:17] Patrick: What investor comes to mind as someone that is either just really different than you or you often or mostly disagree with, but you nonetheless can't wait to talk to each time you do?

[00:21:26] Ricky: I have on different ends of the spectrum. There are more deep value types, like a David Einhorn who's had great success and then been through a bit of a tougher period, but is still a really thoughtful person. I wouldn't say I always disagree with him, but I... Different philosophy and we might only have a name or two in common. They'd be at both ends of the spectrum. And then there's the super high growth. I put my former boss in this camp of owning great high growth, best companies and how he thinks, and I like that aspect and he's incredibly thoughtful. And there's other investors like Steve Mandel that would do similar types of things. So for me, those extremes, I'm somewhere in the middle of the deep value guys and the high growth, great business guys or gals.

Defining and Measuring Success
[00:22:15] Patrick: How do you think about the investment that you're most proud of historically? Maybe tell that story or the episode around it.

[00:22:24] Ricky: I've been managing for 27 years and there's so many stories. I would say Green Mountain is one that comes to mind because it was a controversial name. We had done a lot, a lot of research. Not only was it our biggest position and we owned some call options, but I pitched it at a couple of big conferences. And then relatively in short order, they got taken over for an 80% premium by a really smart group that validated the work we had done. And I would say, this is a recurring theme for us where there is a growth company that goes through its difficult period. You can look at Peloton today and say it might be going through something similar where it's good, has great growth, people think it's amazing. And then something happens and it starts to come down.

So I think Green Mountain, Keurig and at home coffee, single serve coffee, they invented that category or at least dominate that category. And I think that a combination of factors caused some growth to slow. There were patents that were expiring that were going to crush competition. They were going into the cold business if you remember, and people were like, "See, this business is bad." And people were actually capitalizing the losses in cold into the earnings. So they weren't looking at just shut that down. And Green Mountain was spending a ton on CapEx. So the nitpicky value guys were burning a lot of money, but Green Mountain was building a manufacturing capability to be able to serve the people that everybody thought was going to compete with them and provide a bunch of services and be the low cost manufacturer, in addition to being able to get some fee for the system, even if the patent went away.

And so we could see the core business of selling pods and earning a profit per pod was doing well and was going to continue. And everybody was all caught up in a zillion other things, losses on cold, new competition, CapEx. And going back to what I said it to you, I could understand the other side, why they were doing that and I could also understand why they were missing all this. And this is one that got rewarded big and fast. And a lot of them take a lot more patience. I had the confidence because I could really understand why people disliked it. I think one of the things that for us is really good, I think being short sellers makes us better on the long side. So I could pick through these issues that people had and say, "No, it's not an issue." Or, "There's a reason for that and you're missing the good reason," or whatever.

[00:25:13] Patrick: There's no getting away from the fact that this is ultimately a very P&L driven business. Success is pretty clearly objectively defined one way or the other. So obviously that is part of the motivation. And a lot of the people that have done really wellness in this get really wealthy. They make a lot of money. And I'm curious how you think about motivation. If P&L is ultimately the scoreboard that matters in this business, is that the right motivation? What is the thing that keeps you coming back to the well that's healthy that you think is a good thing? And are there examples of things that kept you coming back to the well that maybe you think were bad in hindsight as the type of motivation for investing as a career?

[00:25:50] Ricky: Yeah, I think you're right in your supposition that P&L is the ultimate arbiter. I'm a very competitive person. I have been my whole life and one of the things that I loved about the business, I used to say is, "They print the answer in the newspaper every day." Now we don't actually read the stock charts anymore, but that was true when I started. And so I liked that ultimately we get to figure out who's right and wrong over time and what's right and wrong in P&L. I think for me, what started out as just a competitive drive to win and be better than other people and just have better performance, somewhere along the way in building eminence, I work with incredibly great people. They are smart, they're hard working, they're good people. We've gone to great lengths to hire really good people, train them.

I'd probably take a different view of this than others, which is that this is not a commodity and it's not like if your P&L's bad, I turn you over. There's a cost to finding people, to hiring people, and then to training them and into trusting them. That's very high. And I also want to come in every day and love what I do, so I got to be around people that are like that. So somewhere along the way, it became about building a great firm that could endure beyond me. Part of that's going to be 40 year track record. You can't divorce yourself from P&L. You have to have a long enough horizon to measure that. What's the appropriate measurement? It's not daily, it's not monthly. Yearly's not terrible. Three years is pretty good. And beyond three years, you're probably getting a little too far afield. So there are some measurement issues, but I have this annual investor conference and I used to put up building a 30 year investment track record.

But then a couple years ago I realized I was in year 21 or 22. I was getting close to that. And then I updated that to build an enduring investment management franchise. And I think part of it's that I think it's really hard. There's not a lot of people who have been able to build... At least in the hedge fund industry. It's probably been more true in traditional asset management where there's been handoffs. Doing something that's hard, IE 40 year track record and building something that can sustain, those are things that keep me motivated. And I build the structure into my life and day where I can work hard and still enjoy my life, which is important, having that balance for everybody. We have a gym in our office. I don't question people like, "Where were you? You got to get your work done. You got to be productive, but you have your time." So I think that helps attract the right people and have people stay. And so the six PMs that are below me have averaged probably 12 years in eminence.

The Future for Expensive Businesses
[00:28:33] Patrick: One of the curiosity I have is just your view, given everything we've talked about on the phenomenon of crossover funds. And valuations more generally speaking, you've alluded to some of this. I think I know where you'll go with this answer, but give me your opinion on this style of investing. There's been so much capital raised and deployed into very late stage private businesses from investors that also do publics. What do you think's going to happen here?

[00:28:55] Ricky: I think the prospect of looking at public and private is fundamentally a good one. You get to compare and you can allocate capital one way or the other. And ultimately, the public market in the long run is going to be your arbiter of where all these private companies need to go. They need to sell to a strategic who needs to put it into their system and be public. They need to take it public and fully distribute it. So being in both, I think at a high level is really good. We have about 5% or 6% of our portfolio in privates and doing the research on these private companies, really important. These companies are disrupting your public companies up on the new trends. I think that part of it makes total sense to me and I'm a believer. I think where things got out of whack is in these private company valuations, I think that they were chasing a really small group of public company, growth companies and paying ever and ever higher prices and rounds D, going to rounds E, to rounds F.

I say like, "You guys can keep trading amongst yourselves, but when you come to the public markets, Google trades at 20 times earnings, and it's a phenomenal company. It's going to crush you all." The thing, we have to get to some sense of real value. The other phenomenon that I hear from some people on crossover funds is investors say, "Well, I don't have to hedge. I don't have to short against my private exposure." And there's this notion I'm trying to fight against that somehow P&L volatility equals risk. And this is something that has changed in the market, but a long short fund that doesn't run like Citadel and perfectly match.

If you run with some leverage, actually you have greater volatility now than you had before, maybe even greater than 100% long-only portfolio because shorts don't directly hedge longs as much anymore. But I wouldn't argue that that's greater risk. And the phenomenon that follows that is somehow these private companies that get marked once a quarter or less are less risky, which is insane because my stocks hit mark every day, and risking some young growth software company seems insane to me. I think this is the phenomenon that created the private equity industry, the fact that allocators want to keep moving money to private equity is 2008, we all had bad performance, but you could take your money from us. Private equity had smoother numbers and they couldn't take your money and they got the chance to make that back. And that created a cycle of that. So there's a fools errand in looking at P&L, and that's... I think going back to the crossover fund specific question, I think there are some people that own privates, they're not even hedging their privates with shorts because they don't mark to market and they think that that's the right thing to do.

And I think we're going to enter the next two years where we're going to start to see private company markdowns. Not any specific crossover funds, but I do think when I look at private company valuations and where they're raising at. And then you can start to see the IPOs that they come, they trade up for 10 minutes, and they trade down. And ultimately they're going to have to fully distribute in the public markets and I think that will start to prove to people that paying these crazy multiples for young companies is very risky and probably not a good risk reward. Some may work out, but a lot may not.

[00:32:12] Patrick: I'll repeat it again. Carl Kawaja's idea, everything will eventually trade for reasonable earnings multiple at some point. That's where you got to end up. I'd love to take the lens that you've helped us understand that you see the world through. I understand this question's going to be a little weird, because fundamentally you care about companies and the opportunities that individual companies represent, but those boil up into something, right? The portfolio looks a certain way relative to the S&P 500 or whatever and I'm just always interested through, if you collect a unique lens and set of experiences, how you then view the world at any given point in time. So I'd love to hear you riff on that a little bit. What does the world of 2022 seem like to you, feel like to you? The things that get you excited. The things that have you worried. Just given that you've got a unique set of experiences, I'd love to hear your view on the world today.

[00:32:56] Ricky: I've said a bunch in the last month or two, this is going to be the year where real hedge funds are going to actually show their metal. And by that I mean, individual stock shorting, moderate long short ratio, using some balance sheet, using volatility to your advantage, not being a slave to the P&L. And the reason I think that is because this has characteristics that are very post-1999 to me. Some insane valuation, bubble, concept things that are going on, we can look at whether it's the IPOs that are happening in SPACs, the retail investors, the fact that people accepted 50 times sales for companies. It's just like, "We're going to make a 10 bagger, and then we're just going to own it for 10 years." Let's see how that plays out. You could have said that about Microsoft and Cisco the 1999. And they both did well in earnings, but for a decade or longer, you didn't make any money.

You lost money. So price matters. The big distinction is that I think on November 15th, the Fed actually started withdrawing liquidity from the system or it became less easing. They talked about tapering, and then they talked about tapering and then they kind of... And if you look at when all this stuff peaked, that was actually when it peaked. I do think a lot of this was about liquidity, excess liquidity. And we are without question on the other side of something major. We had the most accommodative Fed anyone's ever seen or heard of or read about in history books for the past 18 months. We had massive stimulus from Congress in levels that no one could ever think about. And then now the Fed is going to be on a tightening cycle as far as the eye can see until one of two things happens, until either inflation is sustainably at 2% or lower and they can sort of believe that, or they hike too far and the economy has a problem. We're just on this path.

And so that inflection point, I think is a really good one for fundamental investors. And beneath the surface, I think there's a lot of interesting longs and a lot of interesting shorts, and we've had this dislocation. So if you looked at what created the dawn of the hedge funds, it was the popping of the tech bubble in 1999. Guys had incredible years. We made good money in '99. We were 50% in 2000. We had a good 2001 while the markets were down. It was almost like your returns didn't bear any resemblance in the indices, and that the growth of the industry and up until the GFC, the industry did what it was going to do. And then the GFC created a whole new set of things that I could... This isn't just like that. There are differences and rates aren't as high and the companies are more real, and I'm not trying to say it's exactly, but there are a lot of parallels.

And I also think that even with the Fed starting to tighten/raise rates, the economy's good enough. I don't think the market's done, but I think that you can pay anything as long as the fundamentals are going in one direction. We're dreaming to dream on electric vehicles, and somehow the whole electric vehicle complex has market caps that can't be justified based on 10 year out economics. It doesn't make any sense. That's going to come back to earth. So I think that's one real important framework for how I think about the next couple years. One anecdote I'll point to you is we have a long fund and a hedge fund. The long fund owns all the same longs as the hedge fund, just resized to a hundred percent. And we have a fee structure that's 75 basis points plus an out performance fee. And we have a hedge fund, which is very traditional, which runs with some leverage and lower net.

And at many points along the way, if you just said, well, what should I go into, Patrick? Pick the hedge fund. It's got all the flexibility, we can use leverage, I can be short bonds. I can do all sort to clever things. And in late March of 2020, my hedge fund was 110% net long. The truth is that a lot of people, I said that my long fund's done better for the last several years. And not that the hedge fund's done poorly, but it's been pretty good while the long fund's been great. And I get this question again now, and I say, I would've been wrong telling you this, and I'm going to tell you this again, but the hedge fund is the better place now and it feels like the timing is more right. So that would be kind of my perspective. And I think the thing that's important, I think a lot of growth investors want to believe that multiple expansion came from low interest rates.

And I think it came from two things. It came from economic uncertainty in 2017, 2018 and 2019, therefore people wanted to buy growth. And growth was actually expensive pre COVID, relatively speaking. Some of it justified, some of it not. And then it came from liquidity. And I think both of those things are different now. Liquidity is starting to come out. And actually we have more economic certainty with the strength of what's happened coming out of the pandemic and consumer balance sheets and savings. There's a lot of reasons why you feel pretty good about the earnings and you're not worried about broad economics. Now, if the Fed hikes too far too fast and kills the economy, we'll have to see how that all plays out. But that would be kind of my big picture view.

[00:38:21] Patrick: Can you say a bit more about, you mentioned liquidity a few times and its impact on maybe multiples/prices. What is the causal link or connection there? What's your model for thinking about where liquidity comes from or what changes it and how that flows through into equity prices?

[00:38:37] Ricky: I'm going to give you two answers here because I am famous for saying that liquidity is as much as a psychological phenomenon as it is a real phenomenon. Liquidity comes from availability of capital at banks, the cost of capital, and it comes from ultimately how easy it is to get credit, to be able to invest that money. And I think the that's maybe the ultimate, you can talk about Fed balance sheet and putting money into the system, and the ultimate economic answers I think lie in availability and cost of capital. Which real rates are still negative. Liquidity is still good, but it was the best we've ever seen at some point in time. Congress was going out and giving out six billion dollars to people. The Fed was buying up assets. 10 year rates got down to like 50 basis points. Credit spreads came all the way down.

So cost and availability of capital, those are the real reasons. Those are the economic reasons. Liquidity is a psychological phenomenon at certain points in time, which is that your desire to take risk, your desire to actually borrow that money, invest in that capital project, look out an extra year in your earnings model, that is a psychological phenomenon. And I like to say the world is reflexive, and it is. Markets could take the economy down. If we have a bad stock market, eventually the next thing earnings start to come pressure. And it wasn't actually there, but that affects business leaders looking at the world and starting to make tighter decisions, tighter hiring, consumers having less money, and it feeds on itself. And I think liquidity has similar psychological phenomenons. If people are more risk averse, if they have trouble in their business or in their investments, they're less willing to make that next investment. I think there's a psychological element to it too.

The Most Interesting Sector Right Now
[00:40:28] Patrick: Do you think that the, I can't remember your acronym, FIBO I think is what you called it. Everyone's become so enamored of consumer and TMT and technology and all this kind of stuff. Understandably so, right? It's become a dominant force in markets, market cap wise. But there's this big other group FIBO in your case, that seems to have been entirely forgotten. My favorite example is that when I started, energy was 12 or 13% of the market and today it's like 1% or something by market cap. It's crazy small. Talk us through that segment, getting back down to your bread and butter of individual companies and sectors, talk us through that part of the world through your eyes.

[00:41:04] Ricky: If I am to look top down, I would probably tell you I think healthcare may be one of the most interesting sectors right now that there is. And I'll tell you why. For the first time in all of our careers, healthcare became cyclical during COVID because the healthcare system was the center of COVID. So somehow the elective procedures, which were not cyclical because people didn't have money, they were cyclical because hospitals didn't allow you to come. Sales reps weren't allowed to visit doctors' offices. High growth healthcare and high growth tech, after we got through COVID diverged. Tech kept going up and healthcare went down. And I think we sit here now where a big piece of healthcare, which has reopened benefits and is actually going to have a snap back and grow up faster, but what's more interesting about healthcare than most reopening is after healthcare, after a company X, Y, Z has its reopen benefit, it becomes non-cyclical growth, which is kind of what you want.

One of the challenges with reopening is you get the reopening and then maybe you don't own the greatest business in the world or a ton of growth, or what happens after that. So I think healthcare is really interesting and part because of what happened in COVID. I think financials are interesting for the same reason you said on energy. Nobody's made any money in this sector. It's been terrible. People kind of hate it. And we're very selective in financials and we own a few, but I do think it's hated. I think rates going up help. I think these companies, their balance sheets are a lot better and there are better businesses in there, what people remember. Industrial is kind of a big mix of everything. I actually think the guys that wrote the book on studying the Titans...

[00:42:52] Patrick: I just saw this. Yeah, I haven't read it yet. I know what you're talking about.

[00:42:55] Ricky: I'm halfway through listening to it. It's a great book for investors, because they talk about how the industrials...

[00:43:01] Patrick: Lessons from Titans is the name of the book.

[00:43:03] Ricky: That book, industrials covers everything from commodity things to great business servicey type businesses. And at periods in time, aerospace was young and growing. That was like a young tech industry, gas turbines. You can look at a whole lot of things in industrials and they were the tech of the old and went through their own cycle. So that's sort of an interesting sector. That's the ultimate bottoms up sector. If I were to tell a young person sector to go into when they're young, that would be the sector. It wouldn't be TMT. Businesses are so varied... You get a wide lens in that sector from great businesses like these business servicey, growth businesses to your ultimate commodity and cyclical businesses. And so you see it all.

Advice for Aspiring Asset Managers
[00:43:54] Patrick: You mentioned in this unusually long tenure that a lot of your team members have had with your firm. You mentioned some of the key players like pods, where the turnover, at Citadel or wherever else, is incredibly high. And it does seem more like these are very valuable commodities, but these positions are treated almost as commodities and can sort of turn through. With that in mind, what advice would you give to younger and investors out there? You just said go into industrials. Do you encourage young people to consider going into this sort of career that you've had and built, given all the changes in dynamics. And if so, what is relevant advice for them in today's world?

[00:44:28] Ricky: I do. I think markets continue to be more inefficient than anything we've ever studied in school, and that is a good thing for investors. I think this is a business, and industry you can continue to learn and it's very humbling. So I love it and I would encourage somebody. I think the advice I would give young people...One is what I mentioned to you before on finding your investing compass. Don't just try to be like one person. Try to take pieces about other people and figure out what you yourself can believe in and internalize and build your own investing framework out of that. The second piece of advice that I give young people is something that I didn't figure out to later in life and I could have done it a lot better is start building a network thoughtfully. What does that mean? That means that when you meet people and you're going to get introduced to different people who can be helpful, it's probably up to you to start to maintain that relationship. And that doesn't mean being a pest.

Every once in a while. Hey, I read this article and I thought about you and one of the things you said, goes a long way to building your network. And then on most cataloging people among industries and expertise. Because as we go on and do our research, drawing on people's experiences and expertise is really, really helpful. And when I was young I got introduced to a ton of executives and I worked at Mark Asset Management, the top executives at Viacom and Time Warner. And I didn't do a great job at keeping those relationships, and I could have. And they respected me for asking good, smart, analytical questions.

I think being thoughtful about that and being proactive about that is a really good piece of advice. And then maybe the last thing I would say is, who you work for is more important than where you work. Take investment banking, which is what a lot of young investors start as a stepping stone. I would much rather work for really good group of people at Jefferies or Ladenburg than I would work for someone that didn't care that much at Goldman. And I think young people get enamored with brands and other things. Ultimately, you're at this phase in your career where the people that you work for and their interest in you is really, really important.

[00:46:47] Patrick: This has been such an interesting conversation, I think, because of your compass that you've developed, that you've described. You have a different take on not just overall markets, but sort of the style of which we invest and what we're seeking, the good pricing versus the good business as an example, relative to a lot of the investors that have become very in this cycle. So it's a refreshing conversation. I ask the same closing question of everybody that I talk to. What is the kindest thing that anyone's ever for you?

[00:47:14] Ricky: I've had a lot of kind things done for me. So my current wife, we've been only married a year, who has been incredible to me and incredibly helpful to me as we started dating, and I was going through a divorce after 24 years and three grown, but not grown children and also trying to run a business and a lot of other things. And she was just incredibly understanding and compassionate about the difficulties of all that stuff and helped me a ton through a very difficult personal period to also be able to do my day job, which has run the business and run evidence.

[00:47:51] Patrick: Wonderful place to close. Ricky, it's been so much fun. Thank you so much for your time.

[00:47:54] Ricky: Great to be here. Thank you.

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
