
Search our transcripts by guest or keyword
COMPANY
Careers
Blog
Shows
Sponsors
Newsletter
About Us
Sitemap
LEGAL
Disclaimer
Privacy Policy
Terms and Conditions
SOCIAL
LinkedIn
Twitter
® 2022 Colossus, LLC. All rights reserved.
Released January 20th, 2021
Founder's Field Guide
Ilkka Paananen - Superpowering Teams
Ilkka Paananen is the Founder and CEO of Supercell, a mobile game developer based in Finland. We cover how Supercell hires and designs teams, why they incorporate as little process as possible, and the rise of global, social games.

00:00:00
00:45:00
Introduction
Patrick: [00:02:11] My guest today is Ilkka Paananen, founder and CEO of Supercell, one of the most successful mobile game developers in the world, based in Finland. Supercell has built hugely successful games like, Clash of Clans and Clash Royale, which have each reached over a hundred million daily active users. What interests me most about the company is Supercell's unique culture built on decentralized autonomous teams with nearly total creative control. Ilkka and I talk about how Supercell hires and designs team, why they incorporate as little process as possible, and the rise of global social games. I hope you enjoy this great conversation with Ilkka Paananen.

The Supercell Story
So Ilkka, I've been so excited to do this with you for two reasons. One, I've been spending so much time thinking about in COVID, playing video games with myself and my young son. I think a great way to begin this conversation is with one of my favorite lines of yours, which is, you once said, "I am the least powerful CEO in the world." I love this concept because it'll introduce the idea of culture and teams, and people that we're going to spend most of our time talking about, which may sound a little strange for a video game company, but I think it's amazing and critical. So what did you mean by this line? Why did you say that? What does it mean to Supercell's culture?

Ilkka: [00:03:23] First of all, thanks so much for having me, Patrick. I think to summarize the whole point about that phrase is that I just believe that the more decisions that teams make and the less I make, the better. In an ideal world, like if I make no decisions, then that would make me I guess, the least powerful CEO. The whole idea about Supercell and what is at the core of our culture is this idea of this small and independent teams that we call Cells, and this independent game teams sacred inside Supercell. The way to think about them is to think about smaller startups within the greater company. That's how we think about them.


 

Source: GDC Vault (Via Gamasutra)

Patrick: [00:04:05] I'd love to go back before Supercell because I think your career up until that point helped inform you on how to build Supercell with less focus on command and control, and more focus on decentralized trust. I think our lessons today will be applicable across creative pursuits and industries, not just in gaming. What were you doing prior to founding Supercell, and what were lessons that you learned or were taught by your experience before this business?

Ilkka: [00:04:30] I guess we would need to go back to the year 2000. I was still a student at Helsinki University of Technology. I had a business major, and in the early days of my studies, for some reason, my dream job was to become either a management consultant or an investment banker, simply because that's what everybody else in my class wanted to do, and so did I. Then at some point in my studies, I got really interested in entrepreneurship and I start to think that this actually could be really cool, trying to build your own thing with a group of great people. Then I just got super lucky. I happened to bump into this group of people who wanted to found a company, and it happened to be a games company. Earlier, especially in my teenage years, I had been a massive gamer and still played a lot of games. Then these guys, they couldn't afford to pay any salary and I guess for that reason there was nobody else who was applying to join them. All they wanted to do was develop games and they needed somebody else to do everything else. I was probably the only applicant, as I said, and then I got the job.

I didn't get any pay, but the funny thing is that these guys thought, "Okay, Ilk, you got to do all the sales for us and we need to give you a proper title so that people would actually want to see you." I guess they didn't know what to call me, so then they decided to call me the CEO. I think I was 22 years of age and of course, had absolutely no idea of what I was doing. I never had a proper job, except for some summer jobs. If you ask my parents, they probably still think I never had a proper job, because all I've done, I've been CEO for gaming companies. Anyway, that's how we kind of got started, and of course, had no idea what we were doing. Learned by doing and eventually managed to graduate somewhere in between. That's how we kind of got started in the year 2000. Set up the games company and funny enough, we were actually doing mobile games at that time. If you recall those days, there was this thing called the feature phones that were coming to the market, mostly from manufacturers like Nokia for example, of course, based here in Finland. Of course, there were no App Stores, nothing like that. So you would need to distribute these Java-based games through carriers. It was a very different world at that time, but that's how it got started.

We founded the company almost exactly at the time when the dotcom bubble burst, and there was no financing available, so we basically financed it by just doing work for hire work. Then on the side, we developed our own IP and our own games. I think we got lucky because we were able to cut deals with most of the European carriers, even with some of the US-based carriers. Then a massive amount of these Java-based phones came to market and actually we started to make some money and the company started to grow. Back in 2004, we sold our company to a company called Digital Chocolate, which was founded by a game industry legend, Trip Hawkins, and funded by Sequoia and Kleiner Perkins, and they joined forces with them. Over time, that company grew to like 400 people, so relatively sizeable game development company. I would call that time, my MBA in entrepreneurship and management. I learned lots of lessons.

Patrick: [00:07:52] What were the key lessons that you learned, positive and negative? I'll combine the time at both Digital Chocolate and your company that was acquired by Digital Chocolate. What were the things that it installed in you that you brought with you into Supercell? What were some other things that you reacted to or reacted against when thinking about how Supercell would run as a company?

Ilkka: [00:08:11] The thing we kept and what I learned was that all the methods, it's all about the people. At Digital Chocolate, I was very lucky to work with such amazing people. I thought at those times that we are going to have the best strategy, the best plans, the best processes in place. Then Digital Chocolate, and mostly because of my doings, was actually quite a structured company and also when it comes to innovations. So we had a process almost for everything. If you asked me, "How does Digital Chocolate think about new games development?" I'd send you a slide deck of like 50 slides, which explains exactly how things work. They had all kinds of processes for like how do they greenlight new games? We almost thought that Mike and I on the leadership team over there, had a crystal ball as if we knew the best what the players and the consumers want. Then we put together all kinds of control mechanisms to make sure that the company actually develops products and games in that direction. But then over the years, I realized that there are a lot of negatives about this type of way of thinking, because...the best creative people in the world, they don't get this feeling of ownership and often times the reality is that actually the people who know the best, what is best for the game and for the players, those people are actually the people who are building the game. It's not the leadership team, like not people like me. Over the years I realized our job as leaders, we should enable these creative people to do their work better, not try to control it. We spend so much time hiring the best people in the world, also at Digital Chocolate. And if you do that, why on Earth would you try to control them? Why don't you just trust them to do the best thing?

One of the things that made me fully realize this was, at some point I started to look back. I said, let's look at the best games that our company has put out. What is the common denominator of these games? One is that they had really amazing people and great teams behind the games, but interestingly, the other thing was that most of these games somehow had nothing to do with all of these fantastic processes that we had designed. The usual story was that we just didn't have anything else for these guys to do, so there are some that are sitting somewhere in the corner of the office and they were just doing whatever they wanted to do. There are some flying under the radar, so to speak, and then the next thing you know, this amazing game comes out. Then I start to think that "Wow, these amazing games may come out not because of me, or the process that I put together. They come out despite all the things that we've done here." That was an interesting moment when I kind of realized that.

Let's look at the best games that our company has put out. What is the common denominator of these games? One is that they had really amazing people and great teams behind the games, but interestingly, the other thing was that most of these games somehow had nothing to do with all of these fantastic processes that we had designed.

Then the other moment that I remember, I remember seeing the very first version of the Netflix culture deck which I think probably came out, was in 2008 or 2009, something like that. There they talked about this culture of freedom and responsibility. They talk more about that from an individual perspective about the employees themselves. Something really struck me about that. If we ever kind of found a new company, this must be the idea. But then they took the idea further and instead of thinking about freedom and responsibility of individuals, they started to talk about freedom and responsibility of teams. That lead to the idea of Supercell.


Source: Netflix

Recruiting the Best People
Patrick: [00:11:43] I absolutely love the idea that the success was in spite of process, the magical thing to have realized. I love how Supercell thinks about the hierarchy of people, teams, and culture. I'd love to spend a bit of time on each of those levels of how Supercell runs, starting with individual people. I know that obviously, I think early on you said the best people make the best games, but have changed that to be the best teams make the best games and we'll talk about the difference. Let's start with people. When recruiting early on at Supercell and today, what have you learned? How have you refined the process of identifying the best people, recruiting them, and understanding what qualities they tend to share regardless of their background?

Ilkka: [00:12:24] The most important thing is, I think we call it the passion for excellence. Just meaning that we try to identify how high is the bar for this individual? Does this individual know what great looks like? That is so important that they really understand and you can set the bar as high as possible. That is the basis for everything. Other thing is we call them proactive doers, meaning is this individual able to get to that bar and figure out a way? Anybody telling that individual how to do so, or to do so in the first place? I tend to think of Supercell as a company with 340 entrepreneurs. At Supercell we don't talk about employees and leadership and owners. We are just Supercellians and we have very little control mechanisms or processes at the company. So for you to do well at Supercell, you have to be very entrepreneurial-minded. Actually a lot of people who have done very well at Supercell, they often times actually they've had their own companies previously. So they're founders of their own companies. Later on, they wanted to join us and those types of people tend to do super well at the company. The third criterion is that you just have to be great to work with. Doesn't mean that they have to be friends or anything outside work. We like people to be humble and of course trustworthy and those types of things.

Patrick: [00:13:46] In this flat structure that you've built at Supercell, I remember studying valves culture back in the day, which is also very flat and self-organizing into small teams, also a games company interestingly enough. It seems like the most important thing then, almost everyone's most important job is getting more great people into the business. What have you learned about that, I'll call it funnel, or process? How has that been refined over the 10 years of Supercell's history? What did it look like to start and how has that process gotten even better? What lessons have you learned?

Ilkka: [00:14:17] First of all, this maybe goes against what I just said about processes. If there's one process that actually does make a lot of sense, it's probably the recruitment process. In that process, you want to accumulate all the learnings through the years that you got. Because as you said, that probably is the most important process in the company, actually. Early on, me and our six co-founders, as you may imagine, there wasn't much process. We simply asked ourselves a very simple question which was, who are the best people that we've ever worked with previously? That got us to... We grew the company from six to maybe 25 or so, and it all came from our own networks. We just made sure that the people who joined shared the same values that we have. Then that group of 25 people then recruited the next layer of people. At some point, we actually created our own recruitment team, which was one of the best decisions we've ever made. That team crafted a process around the recruitment. These days I feel that it's actually quite well refined. The number one lesson that they learned over the years is, don't try to shortcut the process. Every single time they've tried to short cut it, in one way or another, it has come back to bite us. That's the one process that you really want to follow, and you really shouldn't rush it. Of course, there are product deadlines or there's somebody who you instantly want to join the company, but you still should just follow the process and take your time. Don't rush it.

The number one lesson that they learned over the years is, don't try to shortcut the [recruitment] process. Every single time they've tried to short cut it, in one way or another, it has come back to bite us. That's the one process that you really want to follow, and you really shouldn't rush it.

Patrick: [00:15:44] What does the recruitment team look like? How many people are on that team? What does their day to day look like?

Ilkka: [00:15:49] It's not that big of a team. We have four offices and have recruitment people in every one of those offices and work very closely with our teams who need new people. What they do is that they help those teams put together the job descriptions, trying to really challenge these people. They say, "Okay, what type of people are you looking for? Let's actually write it down." Once they agree on the profile of the people that they're looking for when they go out and try to look for such people. Often times they are the first ones who make the contact. Then they basically run the process.

Our interview process, I guess it's kind of famous. It is really lengthy and it takes time. We really appreciate all the candidates who actually do take the time to go through that process, because it does have a lot of interviews. It can be 10 or more. I know it goes probably counter to any logic, but I for example still interview every single person who joins Supercell, no matter which office. No matter what position. Even trainees, oftentimes. The reason isn't that I feel that I would be somehow superior in interviewing people or I would like to make sure that they don't make mistakes, but it's a great way for me to keep my finger on the pulse of what type of people are we getting to the company.

One of the best pieces of advice that I've ever gotten about recruiting is that if you can try to imagine the imaginary average quality of a person at the company and then there's some new candidate who is about to come in, ask yourself the question that "Is this new person, is she or he going to raise the average quality of the company?" That's what I also try to look for. It's been really amazing to see year after year, how much more great people we've been able to get to the company.

One of the best pieces of advice that I've ever gotten about recruiting is that if you can try to imagine the imaginary average quality of a person at the company and then there's some new candidate who is about to come in, ask yourself the question that "Is this new person, is she or he going to raise the average quality of the company?"

Patrick: [00:17:33] In your own personal interviewing style, in addition to screening for the passion for excellence, being good to work with, having that activation energy or being proactive, is that mostly what you're doing is screening for those concepts? If not, is there anything else maybe counter-intuitive or unusual about how you interview people?

Ilkka: [00:17:51] The one thing that I always, always do before the interview, I actually have documented our culture in an old fashion culture memo if you will, and we always send that memo prior to my interview, to the candidates. We actually talk about it and I ask a few questions about it, and also I want to ask these people who join... I mean, we are dead serious about our culture and it has its positives and its negatives, or challenges, and I want to make sure that the candidate actually wants to join such type of company. We are not the right company for everybody. Some people it's important for them to have set mechanisms and control and processes, and they look to their managers to give them a lot of guidance, and we don't have too much of that. So if you're that type of person, then we aren't the right type of company for you.

From Individuals to Teams and Culture
Patrick: [00:18:39] So we've got this 300 plus person group of quasi-entrepreneurs that have been put together to build Supercell. Now we have to go to the level of teams, and I understand that for the most part, obviously the mission of the company is to put out these long-lasting beloved games. It's kind of remarkable given that it's a hit-driven industry. Oftentimes there'll be a one-hit-wonder of a studio, but Supercell's consistently put out these incredibly long-lasting higher retention games. What have you learned about teams? How do you put them together? Are they self-organizing? Do you direct it in any way? How do you create enough space around them to do their thing? Can they just work on something as long as they want? I'm just fascinated by once you get the right people in the room, how teams then become the driving force behind the company.

Ilkka: [00:19:23] This probably is the most difficult part of my and our jobs, just putting together a great games team. There's so much that goes into it. I wish there was a formula on how can you put it together, but I think it's quite a bit of just trial and error. Of course over the years you get some type of pattern recognition of what might work. It's maybe easier to first begin by saying what does not work. What doesn't work in our experience is that if you just put together a random group of absolutely great individuals. That doesn't necessarily, and oftentimes doesn't make a great team. We've done that a few times as well. We've also tried putting teams together completely organically. That hasn't worked the best way either. So I think it needs some direction oftentimes, a little bit in a way like as a coach or GM in professional sports team puts together a team. I think there are some similarities in there.

A great team is something that the core team members, can complement each other. I think that is the key part. So we have to kind of identify certain types of roles that there have to be in the team and the core of the team. If you don't have every single one of those type of roles and personalities, then the team just won't work. As the last thing, once you have found a great team, redistributing that team should be very high. I know it's a cliché that you want to keep the winning team, but I do think there's a lot of proof into that. One of the things that they think about is that of course there's a lot of value in rotating people between teams because that's how you maximize the learning in an organization, and especially in an organization like....One of the biggest risks that they have as a company is that these teams because really siloed because on one hand, we are huge believers in this idea of these independent teams, but the flip side of the coin is that if you have siloed teams and there are no shared learnings, and no synergies between any of the teams, that isn't great either. The way to get those learnings going on is actually rotating some of the team members. So it's always a kind of a...

Patrick: [00:21:29] Then of course, above teams is the Supercell-wide culture. It's a very decentralized place. These smaller teams producing these games fairly independently from what I understand. Talk about the cultivation of Supercell wide trust, not just within a team, and sort of the driver of the environment and culture that you create. Just starting with the negative, maybe what culture doesn't mean to you? We could start there and then talk about what's important to build the culture.

Ilkka: [00:21:55] It's one of those things that's easy to talk about trust when things are going well. It's very easy to trust a team when it's doing super well. I think the true test of trust is when things aren't going well. Moreover, when things aren't going well and then you also happen to disagree with what the team is doing, and that is the ultimate test of the trust. There's kind of a crossroads many times as a company there, and ironically it's related to one of our biggest heat games too. Think about the three most recent games that they've done. Boom Beach, Clash Royale, and Brawl Stars. Every one of those three games has actually quite a big internal opposition, and there's been a lot of people at Supercell who actually thought that they shouldn't ever develop those games or that they shouldn't continue to develop those games, or we shouldn't release those games.

In those cases, the way we thought about them is that sometimes even the majority of people are against releasing this game, but then the team behind the game actually really wants to release the game and they truly believe in it. How they thought about it, they said, okay, now we have two choices. The first choice is let's do what the majority wants to do and it would be not to release it or kill this game, but that would go against what the team wants to do but chances are that this might be the right business call for the short term because we have lots of great experienced people here in the room, and they all think this game won't do well, so why would we release it? It might be the right business call.

But then on the other hand, if we can do that then we can't talk about the independent teams anymore because then they aren't independent. If you do that, even if it would be the right business call, it would destroy our culture. How we thought about it is that culture is the most important thing in the company. It's far more important than this short term business call. So then we've always taken the other path, just to trust the team, let's have them release the game, and let's see what happens. As I said, oftentimes that has actually ironically also been a great business call as well, if we think about the last three games we've done. I really have to say I really admire these teams. It cannot be easy to work on a game where people outside the team think, "Actually, I don't believe in your game."

Patrick: [00:24:13] How do you make sure, given that that amount of crazy trust, even with most people saying "We shouldn't release this," you still do? How do you make sure that the teams kill games themselves when they aren't good enough?

Ilkka: [00:24:27] It's funny what happens when you trust people and you trust the teams because then they get this enormous sense of responsibility. They really think that this is my game, it's my responsibility. How they think about responsibility is that it's not that these people would need to feel a sense of responsibility for example, towards me as the CEO. They feel a sense of responsibility towards everybody at Supercell. Then it seems to come quite naturally. It truly is their call to either kill the game or release the game. That actually makes them care so much, and this huge feeling of responsibility comes in. I think that probably is the secret. If it would be my call, for example, to either release or kill the game, then the responsibility would shift from a team to me and then they probably wouldn't care as much. But because it's completely their responsibility, they really, really care.

Learning Through Failure
Patrick: [00:25:20] It's a fascinating idea and obviously pairs perfectly with incredible people. How often does a game that gets worked on make it out? What is the ratio of games that... Maybe get started is the wrong metric, because it might get started and get killed very quickly, but let's say get started then last for some period of time, and then get killed. What is the ratio of success to failure?

Ilkka: [00:25:42] I've tried to calculate it quite a few times. As you've very correctly pointed out, what makes it difficult is how do you define what is actually a game. Say a group of four people brainstorm a game for a week or two with a whiteboard, it's not a game and then it gets killed. Do you have an early prototype, or do you actually have kind of an official production going on with a full team? I would say depending on how you look at it, I would say that the ratio is probably one out of 10, or so.

Patrick: [00:26:11] So for the nine out of 10 that don't ultimately make it, what happens? When it gets shut down, do you try to get together and share lessons? How do you use the nine out of 10 that doesn't work out, to make the teams, the people, and the culture better?

Ilkka: [00:26:24] Actually there's a funny story about this. We actually do celebrate in this moment, toast, champagne actually. How we kind of got started was that this must be...in early 2011, there was the first game that got killed. I was having lunch with the lead of that team and he told me that, "We killed this game and now we're going to have this post-mortem session. So I just want to tell the company, and the company was 30 people at that time, I want to tell the company what happened and what we learned." I thought this sounds like a pretty sad meeting, and what could I do to cheer it up. Then I just had this thought, "I'm going to actually go and buy a few bottles of champagne. I'm going to hand them over to the team," because it's nice that they can share the learnings and that's how we're going to get better as a company.

Then it somehow became this joke. The point is not that we are trying to pretend that failing is fun. It's anything but fun. You can imagine a group of people, passionate people who have worked for a game for months, sometimes for years, it really has become their baby. So it's an extremely sad moment to realize that it's not going to work out. There just aren't enough players who would love this game. We don't believe in it ourselves. It's very, very sad. What we do think is definitely worth celebrating are all of those learnings that come from that failure. We want to really encourage this risk-taking culture. We want to make the failing completely safe. I believe if you don't take really big risks, you're never going to grow as a company. Building new games from scratch, by definition it's hard because you're trying to create something new, something that doesn't exist yet. If you don't take risks, then that'll never happen. The result is just incremental innovation which we don't want. So that's why we felt that it's really important to promote this culture of risk-taking and that's why we also "Celebrate" the failure, celebrate the learnings coming from those failures.

Patrick: [00:28:15] For the one in 10 games that do make it out, one of the things, when you study Supercell that you find that's sort of mind-blowing, is the incredible long term, I'm talking three, five, ten-year retention numbers of the games. Meaning, if you take something like Clash of Clans, probably the game that most people would be familiar with. Many, many years after its release, people are still playing that game. I'd love to just hear all things retention from you. Why is retention so important? How do you think about it when you're working with the teams, and thinking about releasing a game, how's the idea of that this game might be played five or ten years from now, baked into the design and the thinking? I'm just fascinated by this topic of retention and would love to hear what you've learned.

Ilkka: [00:28:54] It all started actually when we founded the company. We were six co-founders and I think three out of the six people their massive fans, almost addicts of this game called World of Warcraft, many would know. One of the co-founders, Mikko, he had played the game for like five years at that point. I think a thing that he had realized was that the single biggest reason why he keeps coming back to the game day after day, month after month, year after year, it's not even the game itself anymore. It's the other people who he has met through the game. When we founded Supercell, our dream was to create games with similar longevity. We just wanted to bring these games to a much wider audience than we believed World of Warcraft was for. That's how we got started.

Ultimately, it's almost all about the social value of the game. If the game is more fun when you play it with other people, that's a great place to start from. These days players think of these games as almost hobbies or services, and one of the key qualities is that the game needs to be eventful. And almost every single time you come to the game, there has to be something new available, new content. Something new to play, something fresh in there so they are not just products anymore, they are definitely services. I think one of the things that we've done is that we have just continued to invest in not just the games themselves, but also to the community around the games. We organize these e-sports events and e-sports for us, it's not a revenue driver or it's not a revenue diversification play. We just do it simply because if there's a group of players who really are passionate about that type of thing and they want to compete against each other.

Ultimately, it's almost all about the social value of the game. If the game is more fun when you play it with other people, that's a great place to start from. These days players think of these games as almost hobbies or services, and one of the key qualities is that the game needs to be eventful. And almost every single time you come to the game, there has to be something new available, new content.

Patrick: [00:30:40] You mentioned this idea of service, so the continuing introduction of new content, maybe tweaking, making sure that the experience stays fresh. Is there anything else that you've learned about, I don't know, intellectual property of the game, or just the world that you're building in the world? Whether that be the broadest possible reach, how do you make it appealing to many people? The depth of the gameplay. I often read that it's that combination, reach, and depth that makes your games stand out. What are your thoughts there?

Ilkka: [00:31:06] One thing that they've learned is that my most important thing is to focus on the players who really, really love the game, absolutely passionate about the game, rather than focusing on the people who don't like the game and why don't they like it. The thing is that if there's like a group of people, even though it would be small at the beginning, who are passionate enough about a game, then what will happen is that those people will convert other people around them to love the game too. Then it'll start to grow. That certainly has been true about many of our games. Even the latest one, Brawl Stars, which as I said, not everybody at Supercell loved internally because it was so different. Many people say that "It doesn't even look like a Supercell game, and it's not a mobile game in the first place." Just because it was so, so different. The thing is that these biggest successes are not evident from the start. They sort of happen and oftentimes these big successes, they are so so different to what exists in the market today. That means that initially, maybe not everybody will fall in love with them on day one, but the thing is that, are there a group of people who do fall in love and they are so passionate about them that over time, as I said, they convert other people to love them?

Forming the Non-Core Teams
Patrick: [00:32:21] What do you think about the notion of all the teams, I'll call that outside of the core gaming teams, so we focused mostly on hiring amazing people, let them form small teams. Not purely top-down, not purely bottom-up. Get the teams just right, and then really, really trust them to create these great games. Supercell is also famous for the teams and the activity around the games. They're famous for unbelievable performance marketing, for example. I was fascinated to learn about the content that's created around the IP itself, so not the games, but other, say, YouTube content that gets hundreds of millions of views. I think billions of views in some cases. These are not core game teams. Talk to me a little bit about how other non-core game teams at Supercell are formed, the role that they play, how they interact with the baseline game teams. What have you learned there?

Ilkka: [00:33:12] Again, as I said, it all starts from the games and the game team. So that's core of the Supercell. Around the game piece, they have all kinds of different teams and their mission is to do whatever they can to make these game teams and their game successful. Amazing, amazing creative people for example, in our marketing teams who've done these videos and they've even released a short film called, Lost & Crowned on Clash of Clans. They've done a series of shorts called Clash-A-Rama, that's probably gotten way more than half a billion views on YouTube, et cetera. Quality's everything to us. I mean it's absolutely everything and I think one of the greatest proof of that is these videos that you just talked about, the vast majority of those views are organics and they just spread around because they're just great content for our players, and also people who aren't yet playing our games, they just love to watch.

Patrick: [00:34:04] For example, this is kind of a weird specific question, but on the content that's created by a team that relates back to IP from a certain game, do the same independence and trust apply to them? Meaning, can they release something even if the game team for the IP on which the content is based, doesn't approve of it or doesn't like it? Does it work that way?

Ilkka: [00:34:26] When you have a group of passionate creative people, both in the game team, but then also outside the game team, sometimes there is also a bit of a clash. But we try to of course talk them out and I don't think they've ever been in a situation where the game team is absolutely opposed to something that say people outside the game team are trying to do. The nice thing about Supercell is that we are still a relatively small company. It doesn't take much to get people together and talk about things and agree on what to do.

A Day at Supercell
Patrick: [00:34:53] Going back to where we started which is, you as the least powerful CEO in the world. What does the world's least powerful CEO spend most of his time doing? What does your day-to-day look like? How is your time devoted to making sure Supercell keeps getting better?

Ilkka: [00:35:06] Well, I spend most of my time obviously with people. I spend my time with the leads of the teams, obviously. I spend quite a bit of time doing recruitment. As I said, try to keep my finger on the pulse of what going in the company. I try to look for opportunities to improve the company. One of my favorite questions, if not the favorite one is when I talk to the leads is, "What's slowing your team down? How can I help? How do we make Supercell better?" We talk to people about that and we just want to constantly get people's ideas. How do we make the company better? How do we make the culture better? We ask people to challenge us. Challenge existing beliefs and nothing is sacred, but of course, takes a lot of time and change requires people to speak up.

Patrick: [00:35:48] What are some of the most or the most surprising thing that has happened inside of Supercell in its first decade?

Ilkka: [00:35:56] Starting from the obvious when they founded the company. We could have never ever imagined what it's become. I remember when we were celebrating when they got 10,000 daily active users. Then it went to 100,000 and we thought "Wow, now we really made it and probably won't grow much more." Then it went to a million and 10 and then a hundred million. It still surprises me how lucky we've been as a company, as people. Then the other thing is, I still keep on getting surprised how great people we have, and then also these new people come and join us. Lots of people, of course at all the companies, talk about how people and culture are their number one asset et cetera, et cetera. But I think it really is true.

Patrick: [00:36:38] I have a very simple question, which is really based on the fact that you've created so many games. Most of them haven't made it out the door, and you've had so much success, but also a lot of failures. What makes for a good game? What are the features that are shared in common across, not just your best games, but the best games that you've ever played?

Ilkka: [00:37:00] If there was a list of features, I think game development would be easy. I guess on a very high level, as I said before, I'm just a huge believer in the social value of the games. I just believe that if the game is more fun when you play it with other people, that alone will be magical because then it creates an incentive for you to invite other people. Then the game is larger than just the game. It becomes a social phenomenon. It gives you other value than not just the fun that comes from playing the games, but it gives you a context. While you're playing the game, you can talk about something else also with people. That's what happened if you look at how say, kids, play Fortnite these days. Fortnite has become this ultimate place to hang out. Look at kids playing Fortnite, they can talk about homework and all kinds of things besides the game itself. But Fortnite is just the place these gamers meet, and the same is true about some of our games as well.

Patrick: [00:37:59] The thing I wanted to ask you is, about this notion of infinite games. Most games end. A board game we play, or a video game we play, has a beginning, middle, and end. I think you're a believer in this notion of... not just in work, but in life, this notion of infinite games. Can you describe what that means to you and why it's important?

Ilkka: [00:38:16] I guess that's the dream. Even our company mission is we want to create great games that as many people as possible will play for years, and games that would be remembered forever. Of course, it's obviously a very bold dream. It's something that is super important to us. It'd just be a fantastic feeling when we are old and we look back if people still are playing the games would be a great feeling. It would make us feel that we've actually given the world of entertainment something long-lasting. I described how I feel about Nintendo. It is a pretty incredible feeling when I was less than 10 years old, I played some of these games and I fell in love with the characters like Super Mario, et cetera. Then you still have these characters, which exist today and people love them and are having fun with them. It would be just a great feeling to be able to invent such type of things.

Patrick: [00:39:06] Ilkka, I've so enjoyed reading everything that you and your company have put out, exploring the culture. It is radical in some sense, because it's so different than the typical corporate culture, but in another sense, it's just so obvious that you should find great people and let them do their thing. I think Supercell to study as a business is a great example of the potential of that way of running something. My traditional closing question that I ask everybody is to ask what the kindest thing that anyone's ever done for you is?

Ilkka: [00:39:35] I think outside looking in, it might look like an instant successful company, and things have always gone so well, but it really isn't true. I remember the early days, they definitely weren't easy and we had a huge amount of failures until we finally then got lucky with Hay Day and got that game out. But even since then, every once in a while we screw up massively on something. So many people, even in those types of times have supported us. It's hard to single out one single thing. That's something that I've paid forward. Sometimes I feel that in the world of entrepreneurship we talk way too much about people who have been successful. I actually admire more the people who have tried to set up their company and have failed, but despite the failure, they try again.

I feel those unsung heroes are also the people who deserve a lot more respect. I wish there were entrepreneurship galas for those people because it's actually pretty easy when you are successful. I don't think those people really need much celebration, but I think those people do keep on trying despite the failures. That's why I've always really respected the people who have supported us also in those difficult moments.

Patrick: [00:40:44] Ilkka what a fantastic answer. I would encourage everyone out there to just take this conversation and just dream a little bit about what it would look like to adopt some of these principles into what they do because I do think they're so powerful. Thank you so much for your time today and all the lessons that you've shared.

Ilkka: [00:40:57] Thanks so much, Patrick. I really enjoyed the chat.

Created by @ekmokaya

This site uses cookies to improve your browsing experience. By using this site, you are consenting to this policy.
